GOd give 'em joy.
Amen.
Amen, say I to:
The Puddings now in the proof; alas poor wench,
Through what a mine of patience must thou work,
Ere thou know good hour more?
Tic too true: Certain,
Me thinks her father has dealt harshly with her,
Exceeding harshly, and not like a Father,
To match her to this Dragon; I protest
I pity the poor Gentlewoman.
Me thinks now,
He's not so terrible as people think him.
This old thief flatters, out of mere devotion,
To please the father for his second daughter.
But shall he have her?
Yes, when I have Rome.
And yet the father's for him.
Isle assure ye,
I hold him a good man.
Yes sure a wealthy,
But whether a good women's man, is doubtful.
Would it were no worse.
What though his other wife,
Out of her most abundant soberness,
Out of her daily huy and cries upon him,
(For sure she was a Rebel) turned his temper,
And forced him blow as high as she? dost follow
He must retain that long since buried Tempest,
To this soft maid?
I fear it.
So do I too:
And so far, that if God had made me woman,
And his wife that must be—
What would you doe sir?
I would learn to eat Coals with an angry Cat,
And spit fire at him: I would (to prevent him)
Do all the romping, roaring tricks, a whore
Being drunk, and tumbling ripe, would tremble at:
There is no safety else, nor moral wisdom,
To be a wife, and his.
So I should think too.
For yet the bare remembrance of his first wife
(I tell ye on my knowledge, and a truth too)
Will make him start in's sleep, and very often
Cry out for Cudgels, Colstaves, any thing;
Hiding his Breeches, out of fear her Ghost
Should walk, and wear 'em yet. Since his first marriage,
He is no more the still Petruchio,
Then I am Babylon.
He's a good felloW,
And on my word I love him: but to think
A fit match for this tender soul—
His very frown, if she but say her prayers
Louder then men talk treason, makes him tindar;
The motion of a Dial, when he's testy,
Is the same trouble to him as a water-worke;
She must do nothing of her self; not eat,
Drink, say sir how do ye, make her ready, unready,
Unless he bid her.
He will bury her
Ten pound to twenty shillings, within these three weeks.
Isle be your half.
He loves her most extremely,
And so long 'twil be honey-moon. Now Jaques
You are a busy man I am sure.
Yes certain,
This old sport must have eggs,
Not yet this ten days.
Sweet Gentlemen with Muskadell.
That's right sir.
This fellow broods his Master: speed ye Jaques.
We shall be for you presently.
Your worships
Shall have it rich and neat: and of my conscience
As welcome as our Lady day: O my old sir,
When shall we see your worship run at Ring?
That hour a standing were worth money
So sir.
Upon my little honesty, your Mistress,
If I have any speculation, must think
This single thrumming of a Fiddle,
Without a Bow, but even poor sport.
You're merry.
Would I were wise too: so God bless your worship.
The fellow tells you true. 
When is the day man?
Come, come, you'll steal a marriage.
Nay believe me:
But when her father pleases I am ready,
And all my friends shall know it.
Why not now?
One charge had served for both.
There's reason in it.
Called Rowland.
Will ye walk?
They'll think we are lost: Come Gentlemen.
You have wiped him now.
So will he never the wench I hope.
I wish it. 
Now Livia, if you'll go away to night,
If your affections be not made of words.
I love you, and you know how dearly Rowland,
Is there none near us? my affections ever
Have been your servants; with what superstition
I have ever Sainted you—
Why then take this way.
Twill be a childish and a less prosperous course,
Then his that knows not care: why should we do
Our honest and our hearty love such wrong,
To over-run our fortunes?
Then you flatter.
Alas you know I cannot.
What hopes left else
But flying to enjoy ye?
None so far,
For let it be admitted we have time,
And all things now in other expectation,
My father's bent against us; what but ruin,
Can such a by-way bring us? if your fears
Would let you look with my eyes, I would show you,
And certain, how our staying here would win us
A course, though somewhat longer, yet far surer.
And then Moroso he has ye.
No such matter:
For hold this certain, begging, stealing, whoring,
Selling, (which is a sin unpardonable)
Of counterfeit Cods, or musty English Crac•s,
Switches, or stones for th'toothache sooner finds me,
Then that drawn Fox and Moroso.
But his money,
If wealth may win you—
If a Hog may be
High Priest among the Jewes: his money Rowland?
Oh Love forgive me, what faith hast thou?
Why, can his money kiss me?
Yes.
Behind,
Lasd out upon a Petticoat: or grasp me
While I cry, O good thank you? of my troth
Thou makst me merry with thy fear: or lie with me,
As you may do? alas, what fools you men are?
His mouldy money? half a dozen Riders,
That cannot sit but stamped fast to their Saddles?
No Rowland, no man shall make use of me;
My beauty was born free, and free Isle give it
To him that loves, not buys me. You yet doubt me.
I cannot say I doubt ye.
Go thy ways,
Thou art the prettiest puling piece of passion:
Y faith I will not fail thee.
I had rather—
Prithee believe me, if I do not carry it,
For both our goods—
But—
What but?
I would tell you.
I know all you can tell me; ell's but this,
You would have me, and lie with me; is it not so?
Yes.
Why you shall; will that content you? Go.
I am very loath to go. 
Now of my conscience
Thou art an honest fellow: here's my sister;
Go, prithee go; this kiss, and credit me,
Ere I am three nights older, I am for thee:
You shall hear what I do.
Farewell.
Farewell. 
Alas poor fool, how it looks?
It would even hang it self, should I but cross it.
For pure love to the matter I must hatch it.
Nay never look for merry hour Maria,
If now you make it not; let not your blushes,
Your modesty, and tenderness of spirit,
Make you continual Anvil to his anger:
Believe me, since his first wife set him going,
Nothing can bind his rage: Take your own Council,
You shall not say that I persuaded you.
But if you suffer him—
Stay, shall I do it?
Have you a stomach to it?
I never showed it.
Twill show the rarer, and the stronger in you.
But do not say I urged you.
I am perfect,
Like Curtius to redeem my Country, have I
Leaped into this gulf of marriage, and Isle do it.
Farewell all poorer thoughts, but spite &amp; anger,
Till I have wrought a miracle. Now cousin,
I am no more the gentle tame Maria;
Mistake me not; I have a new soul in me
Made of a North-wind, nothing but tempest;
And like a tempest shall it make all ruins,
Till I have run my will out.
This is brave now,
If you continue it; but your own will lead you.
Adieu all tenderness, I dare continue;
Maids that are made of fears and modest blushes,
View me, and love example.
Here is your sister.
Here is the brave old mans love.
That loves the young man.
I and hold thee there wench: what a grief of heart is it,
When Papbos Rebels should up rouse old night,
To sweat against a Cork; to lie and tell
The clock of the longs, to rise sport-starv'd?
Dear sister,
Where have you been you talk thus?
Why at Church, wench;
Where I am tide to talk thus: I am a wife now.
It seems so, and a modest.
You are an ass;
When thou art married once, thy modesty
Will never buy thee Pins.
'Blesse me.
From what?
From such a tame fool as our cozen Livia?
You are not mad.
Yes wench, and so must you be,
Or none of our acquantance, mark me Livia.
Or indeed sit for our sex: Tic bed time.
Pardon me yellow Hymen, that I mean
Thine offerings to protract, or to keep fasting
My valiant Bridegroom.
Whether will this woman?
You may perceive her end.
Or rather fear it.
Dare you be partner in it?
Leave it Maria,
I fear I have marked too much, for goodness leave it;
Divest you with obedient hands to bed.
To bed? No Livia, there are Comets hang
Prodigious over that yet; there's a fellow
Must yet before I know that heat (ne'er start wench)
Be male a man, for yet he is a monster;
Here must his head be Livia.
Never hope it.
Tic as easy with a Sive to scoop the Ocean, as
To tame Petruchio.
Stay: Lucina hear me,
Never unlock the treasure of my womb
For humane fruit, to make it capable;
Nor never with thy secret hand make brief
A mothers labour to me; if I doe
Give way unto my married husbands will,
Or be a wife, in any thing but hopes,
Till I have made him easy as a child,
And tame as fear, he shall not win a smile,
Or a pleased look, from this austerity,
Though it would pull another Jointure from him,
And make him every day another man;
And when I kiss him, till I have my will,
May I be barren of delights, and know
Only what pleasures are in dreams, and guesses.
A strange Exordium.
All the several wrongs
Done by Imperious husbands to their wives
These thousand years and upwards, strengthen thee:
Thou hast a brave cause.
And Isle doe it bravely
Or may I knit my life out ever after.
In what part of the world got she this spirit?
Yet pray Maria, look before you truly,
Besides the obedience of a wife,
Which you will find a heavy imputation,
Which yet I cannot think your own, it shows
So distant from your sweetness.
Tic I swear.
Weigh but the person, and the hopes you have,
To work this desperate cure.
A weaker subject
Would shame the end I aim at, disobedience.
You talk too tamely: By the faith I have
In mine own Noble will, that childish woman
That lives a prisoner to her husbands pleasure,
Has lost her making, and becomes a beast,
Created for his use, not fellowship.
His first wife said as much.
She was a fool,
And took a scurvy course; let her be named
Amongst those that wish for things, but dare not do 'em:
I have a new dance for him.
Are you of this faith?
Yes truly, and will die in it.
Why then let's all wear breeches.
Now thou come near the nature of a woman;
Hang these tame hearted Eyasses, that no sooner
See the Lure out, and hear their husbands halla,
But cry like Kites upon 'em: The free Haggard
(Which is that woman, that hath wing, and knows it,
Spirit, and plume) will make an hundred checks,
To show her freedom, sail in every ayre,
And look out every pleasure; not regarding
I ur, nor quarry, till her pitch command
What she desires, making her foundered keeper
Be glad to fling out trains, and golden ones,
To take her down again.
You are learned sister;
Yet I say still take heed.
A witty saying;
Isle tell thee Livia, had this fellow tired
As many wives as horses under him,
With spurring of their patience; had he got
A Patent, with an Office to reclaim us
Confirmed by Parliament; had he all the malice
And subtlety of Devils, or of us,
Or any thing that's worse then both.
Hey, hey boys, this is excellent.
Or could he
Cast his wives new again, like Bells to make 'em
Sound to his will; or had the fearful name
Of the first breaker of wilde women: yet,
Yet would I undertake this man, thus single,
And spite of all the freedom he has reached to,
Turn him and bend him as I list, and mold him
Into a babe again; that aged women,
Wanting both teeth &amp; spleen, may Master him.
Thou wilt be chronicled.
That's all I aim at.
I must confess, I do with all my heart
Hate an Imperious husband, and in time
Might be so wrought upon.
To make him cuckold?
If he deserve it.
Then Isle leave ye Ladies.
Thou hast not so much Noble anger in thee.
Go sleep, go sleep, what we intend to do,
Lies not for such starved souls as thou hast Livia.
Good night: the Bridegroom will be with you presently.
That's more then you know.
If ye work upon him,
As you have promised, ye may give example,
Which no doubt will be followed.
So.
Good night: we will trouble you no further.
If you intend no good, pray doe no harm.
None, but pray for you. 
'Cheere wench?
Now Byancha,
Those wits we have let's wind 'em to the height,
My rest is up wench, and I pull for that
Will make me ever famous. They that lay
Foundations, are half builders all men say.
My Master forsooth.
Oh how do's thy Master? prithee commend me to him.
How's this? my Master stays forsooth.
Why let him stay, who hinders him forsooth?
The Revel's ended now,
To visit you.
I am not sick.
I mean to see his chamber, forsooth.
Am I his Groom? where lay he last night, forsooth?
In the low matted Parlour.
There lies his way by the long Gallery.
I mean your chamber: you're very merry Mistress.
Tic a good sign I am sound hearted Jaques:
But if you'll know where I lie, follow me;
And what thou see, deliver to thy Master.
Do gentle Jaques. 
Ha, is the wind in that door?
By'r Lady we shall have foul weather then:
I doe not like the shuffling of these women,
They are mad beasts when they knock their heads together:
I have observed them all this day; their whispers,
One in another ear, their signs, and pinches,
And breaking often into violent laughters:
As if the end they purposed were their own.
Call you this weddings? Sure this is a knavery,
A very trick, and dainty knavery,
Marvellous finely carried, that's the comfort:
What would these women doe in ways of honour,
That are such Masters this way. Well, my Sir
Has been as good at finding out these toys,
As any living; if he lose it now,
At his own peril be it. I must follow. 
You that are married, Gentlemen, home at ye
For a round wager now.
Of this nights Stage?
Yes.
I am your first man: a pair of Gloves of twenty shillings.
Done: who takes me up next? I am for all bets.
Well lusty Laurence, were but my night now,
Old as I am, I would make you clap on Spurs,
But I would reach you, and bring you to your trot too:
I would Gallants.
Well said good Will; but whore's the staff boy, ha?
Old father time, your houre-glasse is empty.
A good tough train would break thee all to pieces;
Thou hast not breath enough to say thy prayers.
Set how these boys despise us. Will you to bed son?
This pride will have a fall.
Upon your daughter;
But I shall rise again, if there be truth
In Eggs, and buttered Pasnips.
Will you to bed son, &amp; leave talking;
To morrow morning we shall have you look,
For all your great words, like St. George at Kingston,
Running a foot-back from the furious Dragon,
That with her angry tail belabours him
For being lazy.
His courage quenched, and so far quenched—
Tic well sir.
What then?
Fly, fly, quoth then the fearful dwarf;
Here is no place for living man.
Well my masters, if I doe sink under my busi∣ness, as I find tic very possible, I am not the first that has miscarried; So that's my comfort, what may be done without impeach or waste, I can and will doe.
How now is my fair Bride a bed?
No truly sir.
Not a bed yet? body of me: we will up and rifle her: here's a coil with a mayden-head, tic not entailed, is it?
If it be, isle try all the Law in the Land, but Isle cut it off: let's up, let's up, come.
That you cannot neither.
Why?
Unless you'll drop through the Chimney like a Daw, or force a breach in the windows: you may until the house, tic possible.
What dost thou mean?
A moral sir, the Ballat will express it:
The wind and the rain has turned you back again,
And you cannot be lodged there. The truth is all the doors
Are barricaded; not a Cathole, but holds a murd'rer in it.
She's victual'd for this month.
Art not thou drunk?
He's drunk, he's drunk; come, come, let's up.
Yes, yes, I am drunk: ye may go up, ye may Gentlemen, but take heed to your heads: I say no more.
Isle try that. 
How dost thou say? the door fast locked fellow?
Yes truly sir, tic locked, and guarded too; and two as desperate tongues planted behind it, as ere yet bettered: they stand upon their honours, and will not give up without strange composition, Isle assure you; marching away with their Pieces cocked, and Bullets in their mouths will not satisfy them.
How's this? how's this they are?
Is there another with her?
Yes marry is there, and an Engineer.
Who's that for Heavens sake?
Colonel Byancha, she commands the works: Spinala's but a ditcher to her, there's a halfe-moon; I am but a poor man, but if you'll give me leave, Isle venture a years wages, draw all your force before it, and mount your ablest piece of battery, you shall not enter it these three nights yet.
I should laugh at that good Jaques.
Beat back again, she's fortified for ever.
Am I drunk now sir?
He that dares most, go up now, and be cooled.
I have escaped a pretty scouring.
What are they mad? have we another Bedlam? They doe not talk I hope?
Oh terribly, extremely fearful, the noise at Lone∣don-bridge is nothing near her.
How got she tongue?
As you got tail, she was born to it.
Locked out a doors, and on my wedding-night?
Nay, and I suffer this, I may go graze:
Come Gentlemen, Isle batter; are these virtues?
Do, and be beaten off with shame, as I was: I went up, came to the door, knocked, no body answered; knocked louder, yet heard nothing: would have broke in by force; when suddenly a water-worke flew from the window with such violence, that had I not ducked quickly like a Fryer, caetera quis nescit? The chamber's nothing but a mere Ostend, in every window Pewter cannons mounted, you'll quickly find with what they are charged, sir.
Why then tantara for us.
And all the lower works lined sure with small shot, long tongues with Fire-locks, that at twelve score blank hit to the heart: now and ye dare go up
The window opens, beat a parley first;
I am so much amazed my very hair stands.
Why how now daughter: what entranced?
A little guarded for my safety sir.
For your safety Sweet-heart why who offends you?
I come not to use violence.
I think you cannot sir, I am better fortified.
I know your end,
You would fine reprieve your Maiden-head
A night, or two.
Yes, or ten, or twenty, or say an hundred;
Or indeed, till I list lie with you.
That's a shrewd saying; from this present hour,
I never will believe a silent woman.
When they break out they are bonfires.
Till you list lie with him? why who are you Madam?
That trim Gentleman's wife, sir.
Cry you mercy, do you command too?
Yes marry do's she, and in chief.
I doe command, and you shall go without:
(I mean your wife, for this night)
And for the next too wench, and so is it follows.
Thou wilt not, wilt he?
Yes indeed dear father,
And till he seal to what I shall set down,
For any thing I know, for ever.
Indeed these are Bugs-words.
You hear sir, she can talk, God be thanked.
I would I heard it not sir.
I find that all the pity bestowed upon this woman,
Makes but an Anagram of an ill wife,
For she was never virtuous.
You'll let me in I hope, for all this jesting.
Hope still Sir.
You will come down I am sure.
I am sure I will not.
Isle fetch you then.
The power of the whole County cannot sir,
Unless we please to yield, which yet I think
We shall not; charge when you please, you shall
Hear quickly from us.
Bless me from a Chicken of thy hatching,
Is this wiving?
Prithee Maria tell me what's the reason,
And do it freely, you deal thus strangely with me?
You were not forced to marry, your consent
Went equally with mine, if not before it:
I hope you do not doubt I want that mettle
A man should have to keep a woman waking;
I would be sorry to be such a Saint yet:
My person, as it is not excellent,
So tic not old, nor lame, nor weak with Physic,
But well enough to please an honest woman,
That keeps her house, and loves her husband.
Tic so.
My means and my conditions are no shamers
Of him that owes 'em, all the world knows that,
And my friends no reliers on my fortunes.
All this I believe, and none of all these parcels
I dare except against; nay more, so far
I am from making these the ends I aim at,
These idle outward things, these women's fears,
That were I yet unmarried, free to choose
Through all the Tribes of man, i'd take Petruchio
In's shirt, with one ten Groats to pay the Priest,
Before the best man living, or the ablest
That ev'r leaped out of Lancashire, and they are right ones.
Why do you play the fool then, and stand prating
Out of the window like a broken Miller!
If you will have me credit you Maria,
Come down, and let your love confirm it.
Stay there sir, that bargain's yet to make.
Play sure wench, the pucks in thine own hand.
Let me die lousy, it these two wenches
Be not brewing knavery to stock a Kingdom.
Why this is a Riddle:
I love you, and I love you not.
It is so:
And till your own experience do untie it,
This distance I must keep.
If you talk more,
I am angry, very angry.
I am glad on it, and I will talk.
Prithee peace,
Let me not think thou art mad. I tell thee woman,
If thou goosed forward, I am still Petruchio.
And I am worse, a woman that can fear
Neither Petruchio Furius, nor his fame,
Nor any thing that tends to our allegiance;
There's a short method for you, now you know me.
If you can carryit so, tic very well.
No you shall carry it, sir.
Peace gentle Low-bel.
Use no more words, but come down instantly,
I charge thee by the duty of a child.
Prithee come Maria, I forgive all.
Stay there; That duty, that you charge me by
(If you consider truly what you say)
Is now another mans, you give it away
In the Church, if you remember, to my husband:
So all you can exact now, is no more
But only a due reverence to your person,
Which thus I pay: Your blessing, and I am gone
To bed for this night.
This is monstrous:
That blessing that St. Dunstan gave the Devil,
If I were near thee, I would give thee—
Pull thee down by the nose.
Saints should not rave, sir;
A little Rubarb now were excellent.
Then by that duty you owe to me Maria,
Open the door, and be obedient: I am quiet yet.
I do confess that duty; make your best on it.
Why give me leave, I will.
Sir, there's no learning
An old stiff Jade to trot: you know the moral.
Yet as I take it sir, I owe no more
Then you owe back again.
You will not Article?
All I owe, presently, let me but up, isle pay.
You're too hot, and such prove Jades at length;
You do confess a duty or respect to me from you again:
That's very near, or full the same with mine?
Yes.
Then by that duty, of respect, or what
You please to have it, go to bed and leave me,
And trouble me no longer with your fooling;
For know, I am not for you.
Well, what remedy?
A fine smart Cudgel. Oh that I were near thee.
If you had teeth now, what a case were we in?
These are the most authentic Rebels, next Tyrone, I ever read of.
A week hence, or a fortnight, as you bear you,
And as I find my will observed, I may
With intercession of some friends be brought
May be to kiss you; and so quarterly
To pay a little rent by composition,
You understand me?
Thou Boy, thou.
Well there are more Maids then Maudlin, that's my comfort.
Yes, and more men then Michael.
I must not to bed with this stomach, and no meat Lady.
Feed where you will, so it be sound, and wholesome,
Else live at livery, for i'll none with you.
You had best back one of the dairy maids, they'll carry.
But take heed to your girths, you'll get a bruise else.
Now if thou would come down, and tender me:
All the delights due to a marriage bed,
Study such kisses as would melt a man,
And turn thy self into a thousand figures,
To add new flames unto me, I would stand
Thus heavy, thus regardless, thus despising
Thee, and thy best allurings: all thy beauty
That's laid upon your bodies, mark me well,
For without doubt your mind's are miserable,
You have no masks for them: all this rare beauty,
Lay but the Painter, and the silk worm by,
The Doctor with his diets, and the Taylor,
And you appear like flayed Cats, not so handsome.
And we appear like her that sent us hither,
That only excellent and beauteous nature;
Truly our selves, for men to wonder at,
But too divine to handle; we are Gold,
In our own natures pure; but, when we suffer
The husbands stamp upon us then alayes,
And bas ones of you, men are mingled with us,
And make us blush like Copper.
Then, and never
Till then are women to be spoken of,
For till that time you have no souls I take it:
Good night: come Gentlemen; i'll fast for this night,
But by this hand—well: I shall come up yet?
No.
There will I watch thee like a withered Jewry,
Thou shalt neither have meat, fire, nor Candle,
Nor any thing that's easy: doe you rebel so soon?
Yet take mercy.
Put up your Pipes; to bed sir; i'll assure you
A months siege will not shake us.
Well said Colonel.
To bed to bed Petruchio: good night Gentlemen,
You'll make my Father sick with sitting up:
Here you shall find us any time these ten days,
Unless we may march off with our contentment.
Isle hang first.
And i'll quarter if I doe not,
Isle make you know, and fear a wife Petruchio,
There my cause lies.
You have been famous for a woman tamer,
And bear the fear'd-name of a brave wife-breaker:
A woman now shall take those honours off,
And tame you; nay, never look so big, she shall believe me,
And I am she: what think ye; good night to all,
Ye shall find Centines.
If ye dare sally. 
The devil's in 'em, even the very devil, the down right devil.
Isle devil 'em: by these ten bones I will: i'll bring it to the old Proverb no sport no pie: — taken down in the top of all my speed; this is fine dance∣ing: Gentlemen, stick to me. You see our Freehold's touched, and by this light, we will beleaguer'em, and either starve 'em out, or make 'em recreant.
Isle see all passages stopped, but those about 'em:
If the good women of the Town dare succour 'em,
We shall have wars indeed.
Isle stand perdue uppn 'em.
My regiment shall lye before.
I think so, it is grown too old to stand.
Let's in, and each provide his tackle,
We will fire'em out, or make'em take their pardons,
Hear what I say, on their bare knees —
Am I Petruchio, feared, and spoken of,
And on my wedding night am I thus jaded? 
Now Pedro?
Very busy Master Rowland.
What haste man?
I beseech you pardon me,
I am not mine own man.
Thou art not mad?
No; but believe me, as hasty—
The cause good Pedro?
There be a thousand sir; you are not married?
Not yet.
Keep your self quiet then.
Why?
You'll find a Fiddle
That never will be tuned else: from all women— 
What ails the fellow trow? Iaques?
Your friend sir.
But very full of business.
Nothing but business?
Prithee the reason, is there any dying?
I would there were sir.
But thy business?
Isle tell you in a word,
I am sent to lay
An imposition upon Sows and Puddings,
Pasties, and Penny Custards, that the women
May not relieve you Rebels: Fare ye well sir.
How does my Mistress?
Like a resty jade.
She's spoiled for riding. 
What a devil aisle they? 
Custards, and penney Pasties, Fools and Fiddles,
What's this to'th purpose? O well met.
Now Rowland.
I cannot stay to talk long.
What's the matter?
Here's stirring, but to what end? whether go you?
To view the works.
What works?
The women's Trenches.
Trenches? are such to see?
I doe not jest sir.
I cannot understand you.
Doe not you hear
In what a state of quarrel the new Bride
Stands with her husband?
Let him stand with her, and there's an end.
It should be, but by'r Lady
She holds him out at Pikes end, and defies him,
And now is fortifide; such a Regiment of Rutters
Never defied men braver: I am sent
To view their preparation.
This is news
Stranger then Arms in the ayre, you saw not
My gentle Mistress?
Yes, and meditating
Upon some secret business, when she had found it
She leapt for joy, and laughed, and straight retired
To shun Moroso.
This maybe for me.
Will you along?
No.
Farewell. 
Farewell sir.
What should her musing mean, and what her joy in it,
If not for my advantage? stay ye; may not 
That Bob-taile Jade Moroso, with his Gold,
His gew-gaudes, and the hope she has to send him
Quickly to dust, excite this? here she comes,
And yonder walks the Stallion to discover:
Yet i'll salute her: save you beauteous mistress.
The Fox is kennelled for me: save you sir.
Why doe you look so strange?
I use to look sir
Without examination.
Twenty Spur-Royals for that word.
Belike then
The object discontents you?
Yes it does.
Is it come to this? you know me, doe you not?
Yes as I may know many by repentance.
Why doe you break your faith?
Isle tell you that too,
You are under age, and no band holds upon you.
Excellent wench.
Sue out your understanding,
And get more hair, to cover your bare knuckle
(For Boys were made for nothing, but dry kisses,)
And if you can, more manners.
Better still.
And then if I want Spanish gloves, or stockings,
A ten-pound waste-coate, or a Nag to hunt on,
It may be I shall grace you to accept 'em.
Farewell, and when I credit women more,
May I to Smith-field, and there buy a Jade,
(And know him to be so) that breaks my neck.
Because I have known you, Isle be thus kind to you;
Farewell, and be a man, and i'll provide you,
Because I see you're desperate, some stayed Chamber-maid
That may relieve your youth, with wholesome doctrine.
She's mine from all the world: ha wench?
Ha Chicken? — 
How's this? I do not love these favours: save you.
The devil take thee— 
Oh!
There's a love token for you: thank me now.
Isle think on some of ye, and if I live,
My nose alone shall not be plaid withal. 
A Box of the ear doe you say?
Yes sure a sound one,
Beside my nose blown to my hand; if Cupped
Shoot Arrows of that weight, i'll swear devoutly,
Has sud his livery, and no more a Boy.
You gave her some ill language?
Not a word,
Or might be you wear fumbling?
Would I had sir.
I had been a forehand then; but to be baffel'd,
And have no feeling of the cause—
Be patient,
I have a medicine clapped to her back will cure her.
No sure it must be before sir.
Of my Conscience,
When I got these two wenches (who till now
Ne'er showed their riding) I was drunk with Bastard,
Whose nature is to form things like it self
Heady, and monstrous: did she slight him too?
That's all my comfort: a mere Hobby-horse
She made child Rowland: s'foot she would not know him,
Not give him a free look, not reckon him
Among her thoughts, which I held more then wonder,
I having seen her within's three days kiss him
With such an appetite as though she would eat him.
There is some trick in this: how did he take it?
Ready to cry; he ran away.
I fear her.
And yet I tell you, ever to my anger,
She is as tame as Innocence; it may be
This blow was but a favour.
Isle be sworn
It was well tye'd on then.
Go too, pray forget it,
I have bespoke a Priest: and within's two hours
Isle have ye married; will that please you?
Yes.
Isle see it done my self, and give the Lady
Such a sound exhortation for this knavery
Isle warrant you, shall make her smell this Month on it,
Nay good sir, be not violent.
Neither—
It may be
Out of her earnest love, there grew a longing
(As you know women have such toys) in kindness,
To give me a box of the ear or so.
It may be.
I reckon for the best still: this night then
I shall enjoy her.
You shall hansell her.
Old as I am, i'll give her one blow for it
Shall make her groan this twelve-moneth.
Whore's your jointure?
I have a jointure for her.
Have your Council
Perused it yet?
No Council, but the night, and your sweet daughter
Shall ere peruse that Jointure.
Very well sir.
Isle no demurrers on it nor no rejoinders.
The other's ready sealed.
Come then lets' comfort
My Son Petruchio, he's like little Children
That loose their Bibles, crying ripe.
Pray tell me,
Is this stern woman still upon the flaunt
Of bold defiance?
Still, and still she shall be
Till she be starved out: you shall see such justice,
That women shall be glad after this tempest
To tie their husbands shoes, and walk their horses;
That were a merry world: doe you hear the rumour,
They say the women are in Insurrection,
And mean to make a —
They'll sooner
Draw upon walls as we doe: Let 'em, let 'em,
We will ship 'em out in Cuck-stooles, there they'll sail
As brave Columbus did, till they discover
The happy Islands of obedience.
We stay too long, Come.
Now Saint George be with us. 
Now if I can but get in handsomely,
Father I shall deceive you, and this night
For all your private plotting, i'll no wedlock;
I have shifted sail, and find my Sisters safety
A sure retirement; pray to heaven that Rowland
Do not believe too far, what I said to him,
For y'on old Foxcase forced me, that's my fear.
Stay, let me see, this quarter fierce Petruchio
Keeps with his Myrmidons: I must be sudden,
If he seize on me, I can look for nothing
But Marshall Law; to this place have I escaped him;
Above there. 
Cheval'a.
A Friend.
Who are you?
Look out and know.
Alas poor wench who sent thee,
What weak fool made thy tongue his Orator?
I know you come to parley.
You're deceived,
Urged by the goodness of your cause I come
To doe as you doe.
You're too weak, too foolish,
To cheat us with your smoothness: doe not we know
Thou hast been kept up tame?
Believe me.
No, prithee good Livia
Utter thy Eloquence somewhere else.
Good Cousin
Put up your Pipes; we are not for your palate,
Alas we know who sent you.
Of my word —
Stay there; you must not think your word,
Or by your Maidenhead, or such Sunday oaths
Sworn after Even-Song, can inveigle us
To loose our hand-fast: did their wisdoms think
That sent you hither, we would be so foolish,
To entertain our gentle Sister Sinon,
And give her credit, while the wooden Jade
Petruchio stole upon us: no good Sister,
Go home, and tell the merry Greeks that sent you,
I•ium shall burn, and I, as did Aeneas,
will on my back, spite of the Myrmidons,
Carry this warlike Lady, and through Seas
Unknown, and unbeleev'd, seek out a Land,
Where like a race of noble Amazons,
We will root our selves and to our endless glory
Live, and despise base men.
Isle second ye.
How long have you been thus?
That's all one Cousin.
I stand for freedom now.
Take heed of lying;
For by this light, if we doe credit you,
And find you tripping, his infliction
That killed the Prince of Orange, will be sport
To what we purpose.
Let me feel the heaviest.
Swear by thy Sweet-heart Rowland (for by your mayden-head,
I fear twill be too late to swear) you mean
Nothing but fair and safe, and honourable
To us, and to your self.
I swear.
Stay yet,
Swear as you hate Moroso, that's the surest,
And as you have a certain fear to find him
Worse then a poor dried Jack, full of more Aches
Then Autumn has; more knavery, and usury,
And foolery, and brokery, then doggs-ditch:
As you doe constantly believe he's nothing
But an old empty bag with a grey beard,
And that beard such a Bob-taile, that it looks
Worse then a Mares tail eaten off with Fillies:
As you acknowledge, that young handsome wench
That lies by such a Bilbo blade, that bends
With every pass he makes to'th hilts, most mis•rabble,
A dry nurse to his Coughs, a fewterer
To such a nasty fellow, a robed thing
Of all delights youth looks for: and to end,
One cast away on course beef, born to brush
That everlasting Cassock that has worn
As many Servants out, as the Northeast passage
Has consumed Sailors: if you swear this, and truly
Without the reservation of a gown
Or any meritorious Petticoat,
It is like we shall believe you.
I doe swear it.
Stay yet a little; came this wholesome motion
(Deal truly Sister) from your own opinion,
Or some suggestion of the Foe?
Nev'r fear me,
For by that little faith I have in husbands,
And the great zeal I bear your cause, I come
Full of that liberty, you stand for, Sister.
If we believe, and you prove recreant Livia,
Think what a maim you give the noble Cause
We now stand up for: Think what women shall
An hundred year hence speak thee, when examples
Are looked for, and so great ones, whose relations
Spoke as we doe th'em wench, shall make new customs.
If you be false, repent, go home, and pray,
And to the serious women of the City
Confess your self; bring not a sin so heinous
To load thy soul, to this place: mark me Livia,
If thou bee it double, and betray'st our honours,
And we fail in our purpose: get thee where
There is no women living, nor no hope
There ever shall be.
If a Mothers daughter,
That ever heard the name of stubborn husband
Found thee, and know thy sin.
Nay, if old age,
One that has worn away the name of woman,
And no more left to know her by, but railing,
No teeth, nor eyes nor legs, but wooden ones
Come but in the wind-ward of thee, forsure she'll smell thee
Thou'lt be so rank, she'll ride thee like a night-mare,
And say her Prayers back-ward to undo thee,
She'll curse thy meat and drink, and when thou merriest,
Clap a sound spell for ever on thy pleasures.
Children of five year old, like little Fairies
Will pinch thee into motley, all that ever
Shall live, and hear of thee, I mean all women;
Will (like so many furies) shake their Keys,
And toss their flaming distaffs o'er their heads,
Crying Revenge: take heed, it is hideous:
Oh it is a fearful office, if thou had
(Though thou be perfect now) when thou came, hither,
A false Imagination, get thee gone,
And as my learned Cozen said repent,
This place is sought by soundness.
So I seek it,
Or let me be a most despised example.
I doe believe thee, be thou worthy of it.
You come not empty?
No, Here's Cakes, and cold meat,
And tripe of proof: behold here's wine, and beer,
Be sudden, I shall be surprised else.
Meet at the low Parlour door, there lies a close way:
What fond obedience you have living in you,
Or duty to a man, before you enter,
Fling it away, twill but defile our Offerings.
Be wary as you come,
I warrant ye. 
How goes your business Girls?
A foot, and fair.
If fortune favour us: away to your strength
The Country Forces are arrived, be gone.
We are discovered else.
Arm? and be valiant.
Think of our cause.
Our Justice.
It is sufficient. 
Now Rowland?
How yo you?
How dost thou man,
Thou look ill:
Yes, pray can you tell me Tranio,
Who knew the devil first?
A woman.
Thou hast heard I am sure of Esculapius.
So were they not well acquainted?
May be so,
For they had certain Dialogues together.
He sold her fruit, I take it?
Yes, and Cheese
That choked all mankind after.
Can thou tell me
Whether that woman ever had a faith
After she had eaten?
That's a School question
No
It is no question, for believe me Tranio,
That cold fruit after eating bread nought in her
But windy promises, and colic vows
That broke out both ways.
Thou hast heard I am sure
Of Esculapius, a far famed Surgeon,
One that could set together quartered Traitors,
And make 'em honest men.
How dost thou Rowland?
Let him but take, (if he dare doe a cure
Shall get him fame indeed) a faithless woman,
There will be credit for him, that will speak him,
A broken woman Tranio, a base woman,
And if he can cure such a rack of honour
Let him come here, and practise.
Now for honours sake
Why what ail thou Rowland?
I am ridden Tranio.
And Spur-gald to the life of patience
(Heaven keep my wits together) by a thing
Our worst thoughts are too noble for, a woman.
Your Mistress has a little frowned it may be?
She was my Mistress.
Is she not?
No Tranio.
She has done me such disgrace, so spitefully,
So like a woman bent to my undoing,
That henceforth a good horse shall be my Mistress,
A good Sword, or a Book: and if you see her,
Tell her I doe beseech you, even for love sake.—
I will Rowland.
She may sooner
Count the good I have thought her,
Our old love and our friend-ship,
Shed one true tear, mean one hour constantly,
Be old, and honest, married, and a maid,
Then make me see her more, or more believe her:
And now I have met a Messenger, farewell sir. 
Alas poor Rowland, I will doe it for thee:
This is that dog Moroso, but I hope
To see him cold in the mouth first 'er he enjoy her:
Isle watch this young man, desperate thoughts may seize him,
And if my purse, or council can, i'll ease him. 
For look you Gentlemen, say that I grant her
Out of my free and liberal love, a pardon,
Which you and all men else know she deserves not,
(Teneatis amici) can all the world leave laughing?
I think not.
No by — they cannot;
For pray consider, have you ever read,
Or heard of, or can any man imagine.
So stiff a Tomb boy, of so set a ma ice,
And such a brazen resolution,
As this young Crab-tree? and then answer me,
And mark but this too friends, without a cause,
Not a foul word comes cross her, not a fear,
She justly can take hold on, and doe you think
I must sleep out my anger, and endure it,
Sow pillows to her ease, and lull her mischief?
Give me a Spindle first: no, no my Masters,
Were she as fair as Nil a Greece, and house-wife,
As good as the wife Sailors wife, and young still,
Never above fifteen; and these tricks to it,
She should ride the wild Mare once a week, she should.
(Believe me friends she should) I would tabor her,
Till all the Legions that are crept into her,
Flew out with fire in the tails.
Me thinks you err now,
For to me seems, a little sufferance
Were a far surer cure.
Yes, I can suffer,
Where I see promises of peace and amendment.
Give her a few conditions.
Isle be hanged first.
Give her a crab-tree-cudgell.
So I will;
And after it a flock-bed for her bones.
And hard eggs, till they brace her like a Drum,
She shall be pamperd with —
She shall not know a stool in ten months Gentlemen.
This must not be. 
Arm, arm, out with your weapons,
For all the women in the Kingdom's on ye; 
They swarm like wasps, and nothing can destroy 'em,
But stopping of their hive, and smothering of 'em.
Stand to your guard sir, all the devils extant
Are broke upon us, like a cloud of thunder;
There are more women, marching hitherward,
In rescue of my Mistress, th•n ere turned tail
At Sturbridge Fair; and I believe, as fiery.
The forlorn-hope's led by a Tanners wife,
I know her by her hide; a desperate woman:
She flayed her husband in her youth, and made
Raynes of his hide to ride the Parish. Take 'em all together,
They are a genealogy of Jennets, gotten
And born thus, by the boisterous breath of husbands;
They serve sure, and are swift to catch occasion,
(I mean their foes, or husbands) by the fore-locks,
And there they hang like favours; cry they can,
But more for Noble spite, then fear: and crying
Like the old Giants that were foes to Heaven,
They heave ye stool on stool, and fling main Potlids
Like massy rocks, dart ladles, tossing Irons,
And tongs like Thunderbolts, till overlaid,
They fall beneath the weight; yet still aspiring
At those Imperious Godsheads, that would tame 'em.
There's ne'er a one of these, the worst and weakest,
(Choose where you will) but dare attempt the raising
Against the sovereign peace of Puritans,
A May-pole, and a Morris, maugre mainly
Their zeal, and Dudgeon-daggers: and yet more,
Dares plant a stand of battring Ale against 'em,
And drink 'em out of the Parish
Lo you fierce Petruchio, this comes of your impatience.
There's one brought in the Bears against the Canons
Of the Town, made it good, and fought 'em.
Another, to her everlasting fame, erected
Two Ale-houses of ease: the quarter-sessions
Running against her roundly; in which business
Two of the disannullers lost their night-caps:
A third stood excommunicate by the cudgel.
The Cunstable, to her eternal glory,
Drunk hard, and was converted, and she victor.
Then are they victualed with pies and puddings,
(The trappings of good stomachs) noble Ale
the true defendor, Sausages, and smoked ones,
If need be, such as serve for Pikes; and Pork,
(Better the Jewes never hated:) here and there
A bottle of Metheglin, a stout Bricaine
That will stand to 'em, what else they want, they war for.
Come to council,
Now you must grant conditions or the Kingdom
Will have no other talk but this.
Away then, and let's advise the best.
Why doe you tremble?
Have I lived thus long to be knocked of the head,
With half a washing beetle? pray be wise sir.
Come, something Isle doe; but what it is I know not.
To council then, and let's avoid their follies.
Guard all the doors, or we shall not have a cloak left. 
How goes the business, girls?
A foot, and fair.
If fortune favour us: away to your strength,
The Country forces are arrived; be gon we are discovered else.
Arm, and be valiant.
Think of our cause.
Our justice.
Tic sufficient. 
I am indifferent, though I must confess,
I had rather see her carted.
No more of that sir.
Are ye resolved to give her fair conditions?
Twill be the safest way.
I am distracted,
Would I had run my head into a halter
When I first wooed her: if I offer peace,
She'll urge her own conditions, that's the devil.
Why say she do?
Say, I am made an Ass, then;
I know her aim: may I with reputation
(Answer me this) with safety of mine honour,
(After the mighty manage of my first wife,
Which was indeed a fury to this Filly,
After my twelve strong labours to reclaim her,
Which would have made Don Hercules horn mad,
And hid him in his hide) suffer this Sicely,
Ere she have warmed my sheets, ere grappel'd with me,
This Pink, this painted Foist, this Cockle-boat,
To hang her Fights out, and defy me friends,
A well known man of war? if this be equal,
And I may suffer, say, and I have done?
I do not think you may.
You'll make it worse sir.
Pray hear me good Petruchio: but even now,
You were contented to give all conditions,
To try how far she would carry: Tic a folly,
(And you will find it so) to clap the curb on,
Er you be sure it proves a natural wildness,
And not a forced. Give her conditions,
For on my life this trick is put into her.
I should believe so too.
And not her own.
You'll find it so.
Then if she flounder with you,
Clap spurs on, and in this you'll deal with temperance,
Avoid the hurry of the world.
And loose 
No honour on my life, sir.
I will do it.
It seems they are very merry. 
Why God hold it.
Now Jaques?
They are in the flaunt, sir.
Yes we hear 'em.
They have got a stick of Fiddles, and they firk it
In wondrous ways, the two grand Capitanos,
(They brought the Auxiliary Regiments)
Dance with their coats tuckt up to their bare breeches,
And bid them kiss 'em, that's the burden;
They have got Metheglin, and audacious Ale,
And talk like Tyrants.
How know thou?
I peep't in 
At a loose Lansket.
Hark.
A Song, pray silence. 
They look out.
Good even Ladies.
Good you good even sir.
How have you slept to night?
Exceeding well sir.
Did you not wish me with you?
No, believe me,
I never thought upon you.
Is that he?
Yes.
Sir?
She has drunk hard, mark her hood.
You are —
Learuedly drunk, Isle hang else: let her utter.
And I must tell you, viva voce friend,
A very foolish fellow.
There's an Ale figure.
I thank you Susan Brotes.
Forward sister.
You have espoused here a hearty woman,
A comely, and courageous.
Well I have so.
And to the comfort of distressed damsels,
Women out-worn in wedlock, and such vessels,
This woman has defied you.
It should seem so.
And why?
Yes, can you tell?
For thirteen causes.
Pray by your patience Mistress.
Forward sister.
Do you mean to treat of all these?
Who shall let her?
Doe you hear, Velvet-hood, we come not now
To hear your doctrine.
For the first, I take it,
It doth divide it self into seven branches.
Hark you good Maria,
Have you got a Catechiser here?
Good zeal.
Good three piled predication, will you peace,
And hear the cause we come for?
Yes Bob-tailes
We know the cause you come for, here's the cause,
But never hope to carry her, never dream
Or flatter your opinions with a thought
Of base repentance in her.
Give me sack,
By this, and next strong Ale.
Swear forward sister.
By all that's cordial, in this place we will bury
Our bones, fems, tongues, our triumphs; and then all
That ever yet was chronicled of woman;
But this brave wench, this excellent despiser,
This bane of dull obedience, shall inherit
His liberal will, and march off with conditions
Noble, and worth her self.
She shall Tom Tilers,
And brave ones too; My hood shall make a hearse-cloth,
And I lie under it, like Jon o Gaunt,
Ere I go less, my Distaff stuck up by me,
For the eternal Trophce of my conquests;
And loud fame at my head, with two main Bottles,
Shall fill to all the world the glorious fall
Of old Don Gillian.
Yet a little further,
We have taken Arms in rescue of this Lady;
Most just and Noble: if ye beat us off
Without conditions, and we recant,
Use us as we deserve; and first degrade us
Of all our ancient chambring: next that
The Symbols of our secrecy, silk Stockings,
Hew of our heals; our petticotes of Arms
Tear of our bodies, and our Bodkins break
Over our coward heads.
And ever after
To make the tainture most notorious,
At all our Crests, videlicet our Plackets.
Let Laces hang, and we return again
Into our former titles, Dairy maids.
No more wars: puissant Ladies, show conditions,
And freely I accept 'em.
Call in Livia;
She's in the treaty too. 
How, Livia?
Hear you that sir?
There's the conditions for ye, pray peruse 'em.
Yes, there she is: it had been no right rebellion,
Had she held off; what think you man?
Nay nothing.
I have enough of the prospect: o'my conscience,
The worlds end, and the goodness of a woman
Will come together.
Are you there sweet Lady?
Cry you mercy sir, I saw you not: your blessing.
Yes when I bless a jade, that stumbles with me. How are the Articles?
This is for you sir;
And I shall think upon it.
You have used me finely.
There's no other use of thee now extant,
But to be hung up; cassock, cap, and all,
For some strange monster at Apothecaries.
I hear you whore.
It must be his then sir,
For need will then compel me.
Blessing on thee.
He will undo me in mere pans of Coals
To make him lusty.
There's no talking to 'eni;
How are they sir?
As I expected: Liberty and clothes, 
When, and in what way she will: continual moneys,
Company, and all the house at her dispose;
No tongue to say, why is this? or whether will it;
New Coaches, and some buildings, she appoints here,
Hangings, and hunting-horses: and for Plate
And Jewels for her private use, I take it,
Two twousand pound in present: then for Music,
And women to read French;
This must not be.
And at the latter end a clause put in,
That Livia shall by no man be importuned.
This whole month yet, to marry.
This is monstrous.
This shall be done, Isle humour her awhile:
If nothing but repentance, and undoing
Can win her love, Isle make a shift for one.
When ye are once a bed, all these conditions
Lie under your own seal.
Do yo like 'em?
Yes.
And by that faith I gave you fore the Priest
Isle ratify 'em.
Stay, what pledges?
No, Isle take that oath;
But have a care you keep it.
Tic not now
As when Andrea lived.
If you do juggle,
Or alter but a Letter or these Articles
We have set down, the self-same persecution.
Mistrust him not.
By all my honesty —
Enough I yield.
What's this
Inserted here?
That the two valiant women that command here
Shall have a Supper made em, and a large one,
And liberal entertainment without grudging,
And pay for all their Soldiers.
That shall be too;
And if a tun of Wine will serve to pay 'em,
They shall have justice: I ordain ye all
Pay-masters, Gentlemen.
Then we shall have sport boys.
We will meet you in the Parlour.
Ne'er look sad sir, for I will doe it.
There's no danger in it.
For Levee's Article, you shall observe it,
I have tide my self.
I will.
Along then: now
Either I break, or this stiff plant must bow. 
Come, you shall take my counsel.
I shall hang first.
Isle no more love, that's certain, tic a bane,
(Next that they poison Rats with) the most mortal:
No, I thank Heaven, I have got my sleep again,
And now begin to write sense; I can walk ye
A long hour in my chamber like a man,
And think of something that may better me;
Some serious point of Learning, or my state;
No more ay-mees, and miseries Tranio
Come near my brain. Isle tell thee, had the devil
But any essence in him of a man,
And could be brought to love, and love a woman,
Twould make his head ache worser then his horns doe;
And make him with a fire he never felt yet,
Would make him dance. I tell thee there is nothing
(It may be thy case Tranio, therefore hear me:)
Under the Sun (reckon the mass of follies
Crept into th'world with man) so desperate,
So mad, so senseless, poor and base, so wretched,
Roguy, and scurvy.
Whether wilt thou Rowland?
As tic to be in love.
And why for virtues sake?
And why for virtues sake? dost thou not conceive me?
No by my troth.
Pray then, and heartily
For fear thou fall into 't: I'll tell thee why too,
(For I have hope to save thee) when thou love,
And first beginst to worship the gilt calfe,
Imprimis, thou hast lost thy gentry,
And like a prentice flung away thy freedom.
Forthwith thou art a slave.
That's a new Doctrine.
Next thou art no more man.
What then?
A Frippery;
Nothing but braided hair, and penny rebind,
Glove, garter, ring, rose, or at best a swabber,
If thou can love so near to keep thy making,
Yet thou wilt loose thy language.
Why.
O Tranio,
Those things in love, ne'er talk as we do,
No?
No without doubt, they sigh and shake the head,
And sometimes whistle dolefully.
No tongue?
Yes Tranio, but no truth in it, nor no reason,
And when they cant (for tic a kind of canting)
Ye shall hear, if you reach to understand 'em
(Which you must be a fool first, or you cannot)
Such gibberish; such believe me, I protest Sweet,
And oh deer Heavens, in which such constellations
Reign at the births of lovers, this is too well,
And deign me Lady, deign me I beseech ye
You poor unworthy lump, and then she licks him
A — on it, this is nothing.
Thun hast hit it:
Then talks she ten times worse, and wries and wriggles,
As though she had the itch (and so it may be.)
Why thou art grown a strange discoverer.
Of mine own follies Tranio.
Wilt thou Rowland,
Certain ne'er love again?
I think so, certain,
And if I be not dead drunk, I shall keep it.
Tell me but this; what dost thou think of women?
Why as I think of fiddles, they delight me,
Till their strings break.
What strings?
Their modesties,
Faiths, vows and maidenheads, for they are like Kits
They have but four strings to 'em.
What wilt thou
Give me for ten pound now, when thou next love,
And the same woman still?
Give me the money;
A hundred, and my Bond for it.
But pray hear me.
I'll work all means I can to reconcile ye:
Do, do, give me the money.
There.
Work Tranio.
You shall go sometimes where she is.
Yes straight.
This is the first good I ere got by woman.
You would think it strange now, if an other beauty
As good as hers, say better.
Well.
Conceive me,
This is no point of the wager.
That's all one.
Love you as much, or more, then she now hates you.
Tic a good hearing, let 'em love: ten pound more,
I never love that woman.
There it is;
And so an hundred, if you lose.
Tic done;
Have you an other to put in?
No, no sir.
I am very sorry: now will I erect
A new Game and go hate for the bell, I am sure
I am in excellent case to win.
I must have leave.
To tell you, and tell truth too, what she is,
And how she suffers for you.
Ten pound more,
I never believe you.
No sir, I am stinted.
Well, take your best way then.
Let's walk, I am glad
Your sullen feavor's off.
Shall it see me Tranio
A monstrous merry man now: let's to the Wedding,
And as we go, tell me the general hurry
Of these mad wenches, and their works.
I will.
And do thy worst.
Something i'll do.
Do Tranio. 
A pair of stocks bestride 'em, are they gone?
Yes they are gon; and all the pans in the Town
Beating before 'em: what strange admonitions
They gave my Master, and how fearfully
They threatened, if he broke 'em?
Of my conscience
Has found his full match now.
That I believe too.
How did she entertain him?
She looked on him.
But scurvely.
With no great affection
That I saw: and I heard some say he kissed her,
But it was upon a treaty, and some copies
Say but her cheek.
Iaques, what would thou give
For such a wife now?
Full as many prayers
As the most zealous Puritan conceives
Out of the meditation of fat veale,
Or birds of prey, crammed capons, against Players,
And to as good a tune too, but against her:
That heaven would bless me from her: mark it Pedro,
If this house be not turned within this fortnight
With the foundation upward, i'll be carted.
My comfort is yet that those Amorities,
That came to back her cause, those heathen whores had
their hoods hallowed with sack.
How devilish drunk they were?
And how they tumbled, Pedro, did thou mark
The Country Cavaliero?
Out upon her,
How she turned down the Bagget?
I that sunk her.
That drink was well put to her; what a sober salt
When the chair fell, she fetched, with her heels upward?
And what a piece of Landscape she discovered?
Did mark her, when her hood sell in the Posit?
Yes, and there rid, like a Dutch hoy; the Tumbrel,
When she had got her ballasse.
That I saw too.
How fine she would have drawn on Sophocles
To come aboard, and how she simperd it—
I warrant her, she has been a worthy striker.
In the heat of Summer there had been some hope on it.
Hang her.
She offered him a Harry-groat, and belched out,
Her stomach being blown with Ale, such Courtship,
Upon my life has givn him twenty stools since:
Believe my calculation, these old women
When they are tippled, and a little heated
Are like new wheels, theyl roar you all the Town ore
Till they be greasd.
The City Cinque•pace
Dame toss and Butter, had he Bob too?
Yes,
But she was sullen drunk, and given to filching,
I see her offer at a Spoon; my master
I do not like his look, I fear has fasted
For all this preparation; lets steal by him. 
Not let you touch her all this night?
Not touch her.
Where was your courage?
Where was her obedience?
Never poor man was shamed so; never Rascal
That keeps a stud of whores was used so basely.
Pray you tell me one thing truly;
Do you love her?
I would I did not, upon that condition
I past thee half my Land.
It may be then,
Her modesty required a little violence?
Some women love to struggle.
She had it,
And so much that I sweat for it, so I did,
But to no end: I washed an Ethiope;
She swore my force might weary her, but win her
I never could, nor should, till she consented;
And I might take her body prisoner,
But for her mind or appetite—
Tic strange;
This woman is the first I ever read of,
Refused a warranted occasion,
And standing on so fair terms.
I shall quit her.
Used you no more art?
Yes, I swore to her,
And by no little ones, if presently
Without more disputation on the matter,
She grew not nearer to me, and dispatcht me
Out of the pain I was, for I was nettled,
And willingly, and eagerly, and sweetly,
I would to her Chamber-maid, and in her hearing
Begin her such a huntes-up.
Then she started?
No more then I do now; many she answered
If I were so disposed, she could not help it;
But there was one called Iaques, a poor Butler
One that might well content a single woman.
And he should tilt her.
To that sense, and last
She bad me yet these six nights look for nothing,
Nor strive to purchase it, but fair good night,
And so good morrow, and a kiss or two
To close my stomach, for her vow had sealed it,
And she would keep it constant.
Stay ye, stay ye,
Was she thus when you wooed her?
Nothing Sophocles,
More keenely eager, I was oft afraid
She had bin light, and easy, she would shower
Her kisses so upon me.
Then I fear
An other spoke's in the wheel.
Now thou hast found me,
There gnaws my devil, Sophocles, O patience
Preserve me; that I make her not example
By some unworthy way; as fleeing her,
Boiling, or making verjuce, drying her.
I hear her.
Mark her then, and see the heir
Of spite and prodigality, she has studied
A way to beggar's both, and by this hand 
She shall be if I live a Doxy.
Fie Sir.
I do not like that dressing, tic too poor,
Let me have six gold laces, broad and massy.
And betwixt every lace a rich embroydry,
Line the gown through with plush, perfumed, and purffle
All the sleeves down with pearl.
What think you Sophocles.
In what point stands my state now?
For those hangings
Let 'em be carried where I gave appointment,
They are too base for my use, and bespeak
New pieces of the civil wars of France,
Let 'em be large and lively, and all silk work,
The borders gold.
I marry sir, this cuts it.
That fourteen yards of satin give my woman,
I do not like the colour, tic too civil:
Ther's too much silk in the lace too; tell the Dutchman
That brought the mares, he must with all speed send me
An other suit of horses, and by all means
Ten calf of Hawks for 'th River, I much care not
What price they bear, so they be sound, and flying,
For the next winter, I am for the Country;
And mean to take my pleasure; wher's the horse man?
She means to ride a great horse.
With a side saddle?
Yes, and she'll run a tilt within this twelve-month
To morrow Isle begin to learn, but pray sir
Have a great care he be an easy doer,
Twill spoil a Scholar else.
An easy doer,
Did you hear that?
Yes, I shall meet her morals
Er it be long I fear not.
O good morrow.
Good morrow Lady, how is it now.
Faith sickly,
This house stands in an ill ayre.
Yet more charges?
Subject to rots, and hewms; out on it, tic nothing
But a tild fog.
What think of the Lodge then?
I like the seat, but tic too little, Sophocles
Let me have thy opinion, thou hast judgement.
Tic very well.
What if I pluck it down,
And built a square upon it, with two courts
Still rising from the entrance?
And in the midst
A College for young Scolds.
And to the Southward
Take in a garden of some twenty acres,
And cast it off the Italian fashion, hanging.
And you could cast your self so too; pray Lady
Will not this cost much money?
Some five thousand,
Say six: Isle have it battel'd too.
And gilt; Maria,
This is a fearful course you take pray think on it,
You are a woman now, a wife, and his
That must in honesty, and justice look for
Some due obedience from you.
That bare word
Shall cost you many a pound more, build upon it;
Tell me o• due obedience? what's a husband?
What are we married for, to carry sumpters?
Are we not one piece with you, and as worthy
Our own intentions, as you yours?
Pray hear me.
Take two small drops of water, equal weighed,
Tell me which is the heaviest, and which ought
First to descend in duty?
You mistake me;
I urge not service from you, nor obedience
In way of duty, but of love, and oredit;
All I expect is but a noble care
Of what I have brought you, and of what I am,
And what our name may be
That's in my making.
Tic true it is so.
Yes it is Petruchio,
For there was never man without our molding,
Without our stamp upon him, and our justice,
Left any thing three ages after him
Good, and his own.
Good Lady understand him.
I do too much, sweet Sophocles, he's one
Of a most spiteful self condition,
Never at peace with any thing but age,
That has no teeth left to return his anger:
A Bravery dwells in his blood yet, of abusing
His first good wife; he's sooner fire then powder,
And sooner mischief.
If I be so sudden
Do not you fear me?
No nor yet care for you,
And if it may be lawful, I defy you:
Do's this become you now?
It shall become me.
Thou disobedient, weak, vain-glorious woman,
Were I but half so wilful, as thou pightfull,
I should now drag thee to thy duty.
Drag me?
But I am friends again: take all your pleasure.
Now you perceive him Sophocles.
I love thee
Above thy vanity, thou faithless creature.
Would I had been so happy when I married,
But to have met an honest man like thee,
For I am sure thou art good, I know thou art honest,
A handsome hurtles man, a loving man,
Though never a penny with him; and those eyes,
That face, and that true heart; wear this for my sake,
And when thou think upon me pity me:
I am cast away, 
Why how now man?
Pray leave me,
And follow your advises.
The man's jealous:
I shall find a time ere it be long, to ask you
One or two foolish questions.
I shall answer
As well as I am able, when you call me:
If she mean true, tic but a little killing,
And if I do not venture its—
Farewell sir. 
Pray farewell. Is there no keeping
A wife to one mans use? no wintering
These cattle without straying? tic hard dealing,
Very hard dealing, Gentlemen, strange dealing:
Now in the name of madness, what star reigned,
What dog-star, bull, or bear-star, when I married
This second wife, this whirlwind, that takes all
Within her compass? was I not well warned,
(I thought I had, and I believe I know it,)
And beaten to repentance in the days
Of my first doting? had I not wife enough
To turn my love too? did I want vexation,
Or any special care to kill my heart?
Had I not every morning a rare breakfast,
Mixed with a learned Lecture of ill language,
Louder then Tom of Lincoln; and at dinner,
A diet of the same dish? was there evening
That ere past over us, without thou knave,
Or thou whore, for digestion? had I ever
A pull at this same poor sport men run mad for,
But like a cur I was fine to show my teeth first,
And almost worry her? and did Heaven forgive me,
And take this Serpent from me? and am I
Keeping tame devils now again? my heart aches;
Something I must do speedily: Isle die,
If I can handsomely, for that's the way
To make a Rascal of her; I am sick,
And Isle go very near it, but Isle perish. 
Then I must be content sir, with my fortune.
And I with mine.
I did not think, a look,
Or a poor word or two, could have displanted
Such a fixed constancy, and for your end too.
Come, come, I know your courses: there's no gewgaws,
Your Rings, and Bracelets, and the Purse you gave me,
The money's spent in entertaining you
At Plays, and Cherry-gardens.
There's your Chain too.
But if you'll give me leave, Isle wear the hair still;
I would yet remember you.
Give him his love wench;
The young man has employment for 't.
Fie Rowland.
You cannot fie me out a hundred pound
With this poor plot: yet, let me ne'er see day more,
If something do not struggle strangely in me.
Young man, let me talk with you.
Well young woman.
This was your Mistress once.
Yes.
Are ye honest?
I see you are young, and handsome.
I am honest.
Why that's well said: and there's no doubt your judgement
Is good enough, and strong enough to tell you
Who are your foes, and friends: why did you leave her?
She made a puppy of me.
Be that granted:
She must doe so sometimes, and oftentimes;
Love were too serious else.
A witty woman.
Had you loved me—
I would I had.
And dearly;
And I had loved you so: you may love worse sir,
But that is not material.
I shall loose.
Some time or other for variety
I should have called you fool, or boy, or bid you
Play with the Pages: but have loved you still,
Out of all question, and extremely too;
You are a man made to be loved:
This woman
Either abuses me, or loves me deadly.
Isle tell you one thing, if I were to choose
A husband to mine own mind, I should think
One of your mothers making would content me,
For of my conscience she makes good ones.
Lady,
Isle leave you to your commendations:
I am in again, The devil take their tongues.
You shall not go.
I will: yet thus far Livia,
Your sorrow may induce me to forgive you,
But never love again; if I stay longer,
I have lost two hundred pound.
Good sir, but thus much—
Turn if thou be a man.
But one kiss of you;
One parting kiss, and I am gone too.
Come,
I shall kiss fifty pound away at this clap:
We will have one more, and then farewell.
Farewell.
Well, go thy ways, thou bear a kind heart with thee.
He has made a stand.
A noble, brave young fellow,
Worthy a wench indeed.
I will: I will not. 
He's gone: but shot again; play you but your part,
And I will keep my promise: forty Angels
In fair gold Lady: wipe your eyes: he's yours
If I have any wit.
Isle pay the forfeit.
Come then, lets see your sister, how she fares now,
After her skirmish: and be sure, Moroso
Be kept in good hand; then ell's perfect, Livia.
O Jaques, Jaques, what becomes of us?
Oh my sweet Master.
Run for a Physician,
And a whole peck of Apothecaries, Pedro.
He will die, didle, didle die: if they come not quickly,
And bring all people that are skilful
In Lungs and Livers: raise the neighbours,
And all the Aquavite-bottles extant;
And, O the Parson, Pedro; O the Parson,
A little of his comfort, never so little;
Twenty to one you find him at the Bush,
There's the best Ale.
I fly. 
Out with the Trunks, ho:
Why are you idle? Sirha, up to th'Chamber,
And take the hangings down, and see the Linen
Packed up, and sent away within this half hour.
What are the Carts come yet? some honest body
Help down the chests of Plate, and some the wardrobe,
Alas we are undone else.
Pray forsooth,
And I beseech ye, tell me, is he dead yet?
No, but is drawing on: out with the Armour.
Then Isle go see him.
Thou art undone then fellow: no man that has
Been near him come near me.
Why how now Lady, what means this?
Now daughter, how dos my son?
Save all you can for Heaven sake.
Be of good comfort sister.
O my Casket.
How do's thy husband woman?
Get you gon, if you mean to save your lives: the sickness.
Stand further off, I prithee.
Is in the house sir,
My husband has it now;
Alas he is infected, and raves extremely:
Give me some counsel friends.
Why lock the doors up,
And send him in a woman to attend him.
I have bespoke two women; and the City
Hath sent a watch by this time: meat nor money
He shall not want, nor prayers.
How long is it
Since it first took him?
But within this three hours. 
I am frighted from my wits: —O here's the watch;
Pray doe your Office, lock the doors up friends,
And patience be his Angel.
This comes unlooked for:
Isle to the lodge; some that are kind and love me,
I know will visit me. 
Doe you hear my Masters: ho, you that locke the doors up.
Tic his voice.
Hold, and let's hear him.
Will ye starve me here: am I a Traitor, or an Heretic.
Or am I grown infectious?
Pray sir, pray.
I am as well as you are, goodman puppy.
Pray have patience,
You shall want nothing sir.
I want a cudgel,
And thee, thou wickedness.
He speaks well enough.
'Had ever a strong heart sir.
Will ye hear me?
First be pleased
To think I know ye all, and can distinguish
Every mans several voice: you that spoke first,
I know my father in law; the other Tranio,
And I heard Sophocles; the last, pray mark me,
Is my dam;d wife Maria:
If any man misdoubt me for infected,
There is mine arm, let any man look on it.
Save ye Gentlemen.
O welcome Doctor,
Ye come in happy time; pray your opinion,
What think you of his pulse?
It beats with busiest,
And shows a general inflammation,
Which is the symptom of a pestilent fever,
Take twenty ounces frow him.
Take a fool;
Take an ounce from mine arm, and Doctor Deuz-ace,
Isle make a close-stoole of your Velvet costard.
—Gentlemen, doe ye make a may-game on me?
I tell ye once again, I am as sound,
As well, as wholesome, and as sensible,
As any of ye all: Let me out quickly,
Or as I am a man, Isle beat the walls down,
And the first thing I light upon shall pay for it.
Nay we will go with you Doctor.
Tic the safest;
I saw the tokens sir.
Then there is but one way.
Will it please you open?
His fit grows stronger still.
Let's save our selves sir,
He's past all worldly cure.
Friends do your office.
And what he wants, if money, love, or labour,
Or any way may win it, let him have it.
Farewell, and pray my honest friends — 
Why Rascals,
Friends, Gentlemen, thou beastly wife, Jaques;
None hear me? who at the door there?
Think I pray sir,
Whether you are going, and prepare your self.
These idle thoughts disturb you, the good Gentlewoman
Your wife has taken care you shall want nothing.
Shall I come out in quiet? answer me,
Or shall I charge a fowling-piece, and make
Mine own way; two of ye I cannot miss,
If I miss three; ye come here to assault me.
I am as excellent well, I thank Heaven for it,
And have as good a stomach at this instant—
That's an ill sign.
He draws on; he's a dead man,
And sleep as soundly; will ye look upon me?
Do you want Pen and Ink? while you have sense sir,
Settle your state.
Sirs, I am well, as you are;
Or any Rascal living.
would you were sir.
Look to your selves, and if you love your lives,
Open the door, and fly me, for I shoot else;
— Isle shoot, and presently, chain-bullets;
And under four I will not kill.
Let's quit him,
It may be it is trick: he's dangerous.
The devil take the hinmost, I cry. 
Have among ye;
The door shall open too, Isle have a fair shoot;
Are ye all gone? tricks in my old days, crackers
Put now upon me? and by Lady Green-sleeves?
Am I grown so tame after all my triumphs?
But that I should be thought mad, if I railed
As much as they deserve against these women,
I would now rip up from the primitive cuckold,
All their arch-villanies, and all their dobles,
Which are more then a hunted Hare ere thought on:
When a man has the fairest, and the sweetest
Of all their sex, and as he thinks the noblest,
What has he then? and Isle speak modestly,
He has a Quartern-ague, that shall shake
All his estate to nothing; never cured,
Nor never dying; He has a sip to venture
His fame, and credit in, which if he man not
With more continual labour then a Gally
To make her with, either she grows a Tumbrel
Not worth the cloth she wears; or springs more leaks
Then all the fame of his posterity
Can ever stop again: I could rail twenty days;
Out on 'em hedge-hogs,
He that shall touch 'em, has a thousand thorns
Runs through his fingers: If I were unmarried,
I would do any thing below repentance,
Any base dunhill slavery; be a hang-man,
Ere I would be a husband: O the thousand,
Thousand, ten thousand ways they have to kill us!
Some fall with too much stringing of the Fiddles,
And those are fools; some, that they are not suffered,
And those are Maudlin-lovers: some, like Scorpions,
They poison with their tails, and those are Martyrs;
Some die with doing good, those Benefactors,
And leave 'em land to leap away: some few,
For those are rarest, they are said to kill
With kindness, and fair usage; but what they are
My Catologue discovers not: only tic thought
They are buried in old walls with their heals upward.
I could rail twenty days together now.
Isle seek 'em out, and if I have not reason,
And very sensible, why this was done,
Isle go a birding yet, and some shall smart for it. 
That I do love her, is without all question,
And most extremely, dearly, most exactly;
And that I would even now, this present Monday,
Before all others, maids, wives, women, widows,
Of what degree or calling, marry her,
As certain too; but to be made a whim-wham,
A Jib-crack, and a Gentleman of the first house
For all my kindness to her.
How you take it?
Thou get a wench, thou get dozen night-caps;
Would have her come, and lick thee like a calfe,
And blow thy nose, and bus thee?
Not so neither.
What would thou have her do?
Do as she should do;
Put on a clean smock, and to Church, and marry,
And then to bed a Gods name, this is fair play,
And keeps the Kings peace; let her leave her bobs,
I have had too many of them, and her quillets,
She is as nimble that way as an Eel;
But in the way she ought to me especially,
A sow of Lead is swifter.
Quoit your griefs down.
Give fair quarter, I am old and crazy,
And subject to much sumbling, I confess it;
Yet something I would have that's warm, to hatch me:
But understand me I would have it so,
I buy not more repentance in the bargain
Then the ware's worth I have; if you allow me
Worthy your Son-in-law, and your allowance,
Do it a way of credit; let me show so,
And not be troubled in my visitations,
With blows, and bitterness, and down right railings,
As if we were to couple like two cats,
With clawing, add loud clamour:
Thou fond man
Hast thou forgot the Ballard, crabbed age,
Can May and January match together,
And nev'r a storm between 'em? say she abuse thee,
Put case she doe.
Well.
Nay, believe she do's.
I doe believe she do's.
And div'lishly:
Art thou a whit the worse?
That's not the matter,
I know, being old, tic fit I am abused;
I know tic handsome, and I know moreover
I am to love her sor't.
Now you come to me.
Nay more then this; I find too, and find certain,
What Gold I have, Pearl, Bracelets, Rings, or Owches,
Or what she can desire, Gowns, Petticotes,
Wastcotes, Enbroydered-stockings, Scarffs, Calls, Feathers
Hats, five pound Garters, Muffs, Masks, Ruffs, &amp; Ribands,
I am to give her for it.
Tic right, you are so.
But when I have done all this, and think it duty,
Is it requisite an other bore my nostrils?
Riddle me that.
Go get you gone, and dream
She's thine within these two days, for she is so;
The boy's beside the saddle: get warm broths,
And feed apace; think not of worldly business,
It cools the blood; leave off your tricks, they are hateful,
And mere forerunners of the ancient measures;
Contrive your beard of the top cut like Verdugoes;
It shows you would be wise, and burn your night-cap,
It looks like half a winding-sheet, and urges
From a young wench nothing but cold repentance:
You may eat Onions, so you'll not be lavish.
I am glad of that.
They purge the blood, and quicken,
But after 'em, conceive me, sweep your mouth,
And where there wants a tooth, stick in a clove.
Shall I hope once again, say it,
You shall sir:
And you shall have your hope. 
Why there's a match then.
You shall not find me wanting, get you gon.
Here's the old man, he'll think you are plotting else
Something against his new Son. 
Fare ye well sir. 
And every Buck had his Doe,
And every Cuckold a Bell at his Toe:
Oh what sport should we have then, then Baize then,
O what sport should we have then?
This is the spirit, that inspires 'em all.
Give you good even.
A word with you Sweet Lady.
I am very hasty sir.
So your were ever.
Well what's your will?
Was not your skilful hand
In this last stratagem? were not your mischiefs
Eeking the matter on?
In's shutting up?
Is that it?
Yes.
Isle tell you.
Doe,
And truly.
Good old man, I doe grieve exceeding much,
I fear too much.
I am sorry for your heaviness.
Belike you can repent then?
There you are wide too.
Not that the thing was done (conceive me rightly)
Do's any way molest me.
What then Lady?
But that I was not in it, there's my sorrow, there
Now you understand me, for Isle tell you,
It was so sound a piece, and so well carried,
And if you mark the way, so handsomely,
Of such a height, and excellence, and art
I have not known a braver, for conceive me,
When the gross fool her husband would be sick —
Pray stay.
Nay, good, your patience: and no sense for it,
Then stepped your daughter in.
By your appointment.
I would it had, on that condition
I had but one half smock, I like it so well;
And like an excellent cunning woman, cured me
One madness with an other, which was rare,
And to our weak beliefs, a wonder.
Hang ye,
For surely, if your husband look not to ye,
I know what will.
I humbly thank your worship.
And so I take my leave.
You have a hand I hear too.
I have two sir.
In my young daughters business.
You will find there
A fitter hand then mine, to reach her frets,
And play down diddle to her.
I shall watch ye.
Doe.
And I shall have justice.
Where?
That's all one;
I shall be with you at a turn hence forward.
Get you a posit too; and so good even sir.
And as I told your worship, all the hangings,
Brass, Pewter, Plate, even to the very looking-glasses.
And that that hung for our defence, the Armour,
And the march Beer was going too: Oh Iaques
What a sad sight was that?
Even the two Rundlets,
The two that was our hope, of Muskadell,
(Better nev'r tongue tripped over) these two Cannons,
To batter brawn withal at Christmas, sir
Even those two lovely twins, the enemy
Had almost cut off clean.
Go trim the house up.
And put the things in order as they were. 
I shall find time for all this: could I find her
But constant any way, I had done my business;
Were she a whore directly, or a scold,
An unthrift, or a woman made to hate me,
I had my wish, and knew which way to rain her:
But while she shows all these, and all their losses,
A kind of linsey woolsey, mingled mischief
Not to be guest at, and whether true, or borrowed,
Not certain neither, what a hap had I, 
And what a tydie fortune, when my fate
Flung me upon this Beare-whelp? here she comes
Now if she have a colour, for the fault is
A cleanly one, upon my conscience
I shall forgive her yet, and find a something
Certain, I married for: her wit: Isle mark her.
Not let his wife come near him in his sickness,
Not come to comfort him? she that all laws
Of heaven, and Nations have ordained his second,
Is she refused? and two old Paradoxes,
Pieces of five and fifty, without faith
Clapped in upon him? he has a little pet,
That all young wives must follow necessary
Having their Mayden-heads—
This is an Axiom
I never heard before.
Or say rebellion
If we durst be so foul, which two fair words
Alas win us from, in an hour, an instant,
We are so easy, make him so forgetful
Both of his reason, honesty, and credit,
As to deny his wife a visitation?
His wife, that (though she was a little foolish,)
Loved him, Oh heaven forgive her for it! nay doted,
Nay had run mad, had she not married him,
Though I doe know this falser then the devil,
I cannot choose but love it.
What doe I know
But those that came to keep him, might have killed him,
In what a case had I been then? I dare not
Believe him such a base, debauched companion,
That one refusal of a tender maid
Would make him feign this s•cknesse out of need,
And take a Keeper to him of fourscore
To play at Billiards; one that mewed content
And all her teeth together; not come near him?
This woman would have made a most rare Jesuite
She can prevaricate on any thing:
There was not to be thought a way to save her
In all imagination, beside this.
His unkind dealing, which was, worst of all,
In sending, who knows whether, all the plate,
And all the household-stuff, had I not crossed it,
By a great providence, and my friends assistance
Which he will thank me one day for: alas,
I could have watched as well as they, have served him
In any use, better, and willinger.
The Law commands me to doe it, love commands me.
And my own duty charges me.
Heaven bless me.
And now I have said my Prayers, Isle go to her:
Are you a wife for any man?
For you Sir.
If I were worse, I were better; That you are well,
At least, that you appear so, I thank heaven,
Long may it hold and that you are here, I am glad too,
But that you have abused me wretchedly,
And such a way that shames the name of husband,
Such a malicious mangy way, so mingled,
(Never look strangely on me, I dare tell you)
With breach of honesty, care, kindness, manners.
Holla, you kick too fast.
Was I a stranger?
Or had I vowed perdition to your person?
Am I not married to you, tell me that?
I would I could not tell you.
Is my presence,
The stock I come of, which is worshipful,
If I should say right worshipful, I lied not,
My Grandsire was a Knight.
Of the Shire?
A Soldier,
Which none of all thy Family ever heard off,
But one conductor of thy name, a Grassier
That ran away with pay: or am I grown
(Because I have been a little peevish to you,
Only to try your temper) such a dogge-latch
I could not be admitted to your presence?
If I endure this, hang me.
And two deaths heads,
Two Harry Groats, that had their faces worn,
Almost their names away too.
Now hear me.
For I will stay no longer.
This you shall:
How ever you shall think to flatter me,
For this offence, which no submission.
Can ever mediate for, you'll find it so,
What ever you shall doe by intercession,
What you can offer, what your Land can purchase,
What all your friends, or families can win,
Shall be but this, not to forswear your knowledge,
But ever to forbear it: now your will sir.
Thou art the subtlest woman I think living,
I am sure the lewdest; now be still, and mark me;
Were I but any way addicted to the devil,
I should now think I had met a play-fellow
To profit by, and that way the most learned
That ever taught to murmur. Tell me thou,
Thou most poor, paltry spiteful whore: doe you cry?
Isle make you roar, before I leave.
Your pleasure.
Was it not sin enough, thou Fruiterer
Full of the fall thou eat'st: thou devils broker,
Thou Seminary of all sedition,
Thou sword of veng'ance, with a thread hung o'er us,
Was it not sin enough, and wickedness
In full abundance? was it not vexation
At all points, cap a pe? nay, I shall pinch you,
Thus like a rotten rascal to abuse.
The name of heaven, the tie of marriage,
The honour of thy friends; the expectation
Of all that thought thee virtuous, with rebellion,
Childish and base rebellion, but continuing.
After forgiveness too, and worse, your mischief,
And against him setting the hope of heaven by,
And the dear reservation of his honour
Nothing above ground could have won to hate thee:
Well go thy ways.
Yes.
You shall hear me out first:
What punishment mai'st thou deserve, thou thing,
Thou Idle thing of nothing, thou pulled Primrose,
That two hours after, art a weed, and withered,
For this last flourish on me? am I one
Selected out of all the husbands living,
To be so ridden by a Tit of ten pence,
Am I so blind and Bed-rid? I was mad,
And had the Plague, and no man must come near me,
I must be shut up, and my substance bezel'd,
And an old woman watch me.
Well sir, well,
You may well glory in it.
And when it comes to opening, it is my plot,
I must undo my self forsooth: dost hear me?
If I should beat thee now, as much may be,
Dost thou not well deserve it, of thy conscience,
Dost thou not cry, come beat me?
I defy you.
And my last loving tears farewell: the first stroke,
The very first you give me if you dare strike,
Try me, and you shall find it so, for ever
Never to be recalled: I know you love me,
Mad till you have enjoyed me; I doe turn
Utterly from you, and what man I meet first,
That has but spirit to deserve a favour,
Let him bear any shape, the worse the better,
Shall kill you, and enjoy me; what I have said
About your foolish sickness, ever you have me
As you would have me, you shall swear, is certain,
And challenge any man, that dares deny it;
And in all companies approve my actions,
And so farewell for this time. 
Grief go with thee,
If there be any witchcrafts, herbs, or potions,
Saying my Prayers back-ward, Fiends, or Fairies
That can again unlove me, I am made. 
Mistress, you must doe it.
Are the writings ready I told you of?
Yes they are ready, but to what use I know not.
You're an Ass, you must have all things construed,
Yes, and pierced too,
Or I find little pleasure.
Now you are knavish,
Go too, fetch Rowland hither presently,
Your twenty pound lies bleeding else: she is married
Within these twelve hours, if we cross it not,
And see the Papers of one size.
I have ye.
And for disposing of 'em.
If I fail you
Now I have found the way, use Marshall Law
And cut my head off with a hand Saw:
Well sir.
Petronius and Moroso I'll see sent for
About your business; go.
I am gone. 
Ho Livia. 
Who's that?
A friend of yours, Lord how you look now,
As if you had lost a Carrack.
O Byancha.
I am the most undone, unhappy woman.
Be quiet wench, thou shalt be done, and done,
And done, and double done, or all shall split for it,
No more of these minced passions, they are mangy,
And ease thee of nothing, but a little wind,
An apple will doe more: thou fear Moroso.
Even as I fear the Gallows.
Keep thee there still.
And you love Rowland? say.
If I say not
I am sure I lye.
What would thou give that woman,
In spite of all his anger, and thy fear,
And all thy Fathers policy, that could
Clap ye within these two nights quietly
Into a Bed together?
How?
Why fairly,
At half sword man and wife: now the red blood comes,
I marry now the matters changed.
Byancha,
Me thinks you should not mock me.
Mock a pudding.
I speak good honest English, and good meaning.
I should not be ungrateful to that woman.
I know thou would not, follow but my Counpell
And if thou hast him not, despite of fortune
Let me nev'r know a good night more; you must
Be very sick of the instant.
Well, what follows?
And in that sickness send for all your friends,
Your Father, and your feavor old Moroso,
And Rowland shall be there too.
What of these?
Doe you not twitter yet? of this shall follow
That which shall make thy heart leap, and thy lips
Venture as many kisses, as the Merchants
Doe dollars to the East-Indies: you shall know all,
But first walk in, and practise, pray be sick.
I doe believe you: and I am sick.
Doe
To bed then, come, Isle send away your Servants
Post for your Fool, and Father; and good fortune,
As we mean honesty, now strike an up-shot. 
Nay, on my conscience, I have lost my money,
But that's all one: Isle never more persuade you,
I see you are resolute, and I commend you.
But did she send for me?
You dare believe me.
I cannot tell, you have your ways for profit
Allowed you Tranio, as well as I
Have to avoid 'em fear:
No, on my word sir
l deal directly with you. 
How now fellow,
Whither Post you so fast?
O sir my Master
Pray did you see my Master?
Why your Master?
Sir his Jewel.
With the gilded Button?
My pretty Mistress Livia.
What of her?
Is fallen sick of the sudden.
How of the sullens?
Of the sudden sir, I say, very sick:
It seems she hath got the toothache with raw apples.
It seems you have got the headache, fare you well sir.
You did not see my Master?
Who told you so?
No, no, he did not see him.
Farewell blew bottle. 
What should her sickness be?
For you it may be.
Yes when my brains are out, I may believe it,
Never before I am sure: yet I may see her
Twill be a point of honesty:
It will so.
It may be not too: you would fine be fingering
This old sinne-offring of two hundred, Tranio,
How daintily, and cunningly you drive me
Up like a Dear to'th toil, yet I may leap it,
And what's the woodman then?
A looser by you.
Speak will you go or not? to me it is equal.
Come what goes less?
Nay not a penny Rowland.
Shall I have liberty of conscience
Which by interpretation, is ten kisses?
Hang me if I affect her: yet it may be,
This whoreson manners will require a struggling,
Of two and twenty, or by'r-Lady thirty.
By'r-lady Isle require my wager then,
For if you kiss so often, and no kindness,
I have lost my speculation, i'll allow you —
Speak like a Gamester now.
It may be two.
Under a dozen Tranio 'ther's no settings,
You shall have forty shillings, wink at small faults.
Say I take twenty, come, by all that's honest
I doe it but to vex her.
Isle no by-lowes.
If you can love her doe, if you can hate her,
Or any else that loves you.
Prithee Tranio.
Why farewell twenty pound, twill not undo me;
You have my resolution.
And your money,
Which since you are so stubborn, if I forfeit,
Make me a Jack of Lent, and break shins
For untag'd points and Counters: Isle go with you,
But if thou got a penny by the bargain;
A parting kiss is lawful?
I allow it.
Knock out my brains with Apples; yet a bargain:
I tell you, i'll no bargains; win, and wear it.
Thou art the strangest fellow.
That's all one.
Along then, twenty pound more if thou dare,
I give her not a good word.
Not a Penny. 
Prithee, entreat her come, I will not trouble her 
Above a word or two; ere I endure
This life, and with a woman, and a vowed one
To all the mischiefs she can lay upon me,
Isle go to Plough again, and eat leek Porridge;
Begging's a pleasure to 't not to be numberd:
No there be other Countries Iaques for me, and other people, yea, and other women.
If I have need, here's money, there's your ware,
Which is fair dealing, and the Sun, they say
Shines as warm there, as here, and till I have lost
Either my self, or her, I care not whether
Nor which first.
Will your worship hear me?
And utterly outworn the memory
Of such a curse as this, none of my Nation
Shall ever know me more.
Out alas sir
What a strange way doe you run?
Any way,
So I out-runne this rascal.
Me thinks now,
If your good worship could but have the patience.
The patience, why the patience?
Why i'll tell you,
Could you but have the patience.
Well the patience.
To laugh at all she do's, or when she rails,
To have a drum beaten of the top of the house,
To give the neighbours warning of her Larme,
As I doe when my wife rebels.
Thy wife?
Thy wife's a Pigeon to her a mere slumber,
The dead of night's not stiller.
Nor an Iron Mill.
But thy wife is certain.
That's false Doctrine,
You never read of a certain woman.
Thou know her way.
I should doe, I am sure.
I have ridden it night, and day, this twenty year.
But mine is such a drench of Balderdash,
Such a strange carded cunningnesse, the Rainbow
When she hangs bent in heaven, sheds not her colours
Quicker and more then this deceitful woman 
Weaves in her dyes of wickedness: what says she?
Nay not a word sir, but she pointed to me,
As though she meant to follow; pray sir bear it
Even as you may, I need not teach your worship,
The best men have their crosses, we are all mortal.
What ails the fellow?
And no doubt she may sir
What may she, or what do's she, or what is she?
Speak and be hanged.
She's mad Sir.
Heaven continue it.
Amen if it be his pleasure
How mad is she?
As mad as heart can wish sir: she has dressed her self
(Saving your worships reverence) just in the cut
Of one of those that multiply in the Suburbs
For single money, and as durtily:
If any speak to her, first she whistles,
And then begins her compass with her fingers,
And points to what she would have.
What new waye's this?
There came in Master Sophocles,
And what
Did Master Sophocles when he came in?
Get my Trunks ready sirha, i'll be gone straight.
He's here to tell you 
She's horn mad Iaques.
Call ye this a woman?
Yes sir, she is a woman,
Sir, I doubt it.
I had thought you had make experience,
Yes I did so.
And almost with my life.
You rid too fast sir.
Pray be not mistaken: by this hand
Your wife's as chaste, and honest as a virgin,
For any thing I know: it is true she gave me
A Ring.
For rutting.
You are much deceived still,
Believe me, I never kissed her since, and now
Coming in visitation, like a friend,
I think she is mad sir, suddenly she started,
And snatched the Ring away, and drew her knife out,
To what intent I know not.
Is this certain?
As I am here sir.
I believe ypvi honest. 
And pray continue so.
She comes.
Now Damsel,
What will your beauty doe, if I forsake you?
Doe you deal by signs, and tokens? as I guess then,
You'll walk abroad, this Summer, and catch Captains,
Or hire a piece of holy ground in the Suburbs,
And keep a nest of Nuns?
O doe not stir her!
You see in what a case she is?
She is dogged,
And in a beastly case I am sure: Isle make her
If she have any tongue, yet tatle 
Prithee observe this woman seriously,
And eye her well, and when thou hast done, but tell me
(For thou hast understanding) in what case
My sense was, when I chose this thing.
Isle tell you
I have seen a sweeter—
An hundred times cry oysters.
Ther's a poor Beggar wench about Black-Fryers
Runs on her breech may be an Empress to her.
Nay, now you are too bitter.
Nev'r a whit sir:
Isle tell thee woman; for now I have day to see thee,
And all my wits about me, and I speak
Not out of passion neither (leave your mumping)
I know you're well enough: Now would I give
A million but to vex her: when I chose thee
To make a Bedfellow, I took more trouble,
Then twenty Terms can come too, such a cause
Of such a title, and so everlasting
That Adams Genealogy may be ended
Ere any law find thee: I took a Leprosy,
Nay worse, the plague, nay worse yet, a possession
And had the devil with thee, if not more:
And yet worse, was a beast, and like a beast
Had my reward, a Jade to fiing my fortunes;
For who that had but reason to distinguish
The light from darkness, wine from water, hunger
from full society, and Fox from fern bush
That would have married thee?
She is not so ill.
She's worse then I dare think of: she's so lewd,
No Court is strong enough to bear her cause.
She hath neither manners, honesty, behavour,
Wise-hood, nor woman-hood, nor any moral
Can force me think she had a mother, no
I do believe her steadfastly, and know her
To be a woman-Woolfe by transmigration,
Her first form was a Ferrets underground,
She kills the memories of men: not yet?
Do you think she's sensible of this?
I care not,
Be what she will the pleasure I take in her,
Thus I blow off, the care I took to love her,
Like this point I untie, and thus I loose it,
The husband I am to her, thus I sever:
My vanity farewell: yet, for you have bin
So near me as to bear the name of wife,
My unquenched charity shall tell you thus much
(Though you deserve it well) you shall not beg,
What I ordan'd your Jointure, honestly
You shall have settled on you: and half my house,
The other half shall be employed in prayers,
(That meritorious charge Isle beat also
Yet to confirm you christian) your apparel,
And what belongs to build up such a folly,
Keep I beseech you, it infects our uses,
And now I am for travel.
Now I love you,
And now I see you are a man isle talk to you,
And I forget your bitterness.
How now man?
O Pliny, if thou wilt be ever famous
Make but this woman all thy wonders.
Sure sir
You have hit upon a happy course, a blessed,
And what will make you virtuous?
She'll ship me.
A way of understanding I long wished for,
And now tic come, take heed you fly not back sir,
Me thinks you look a new man to me now,
A man of excellence, and now I see
Some great design set in you: you may think now
(And so may most that know me) it were my part
Weakly to weep your loss, and to resist you,
Nay hang about your neck and like a dotard
Urge my strong tie upon you: but I love you,
And all the world shall know it, beyond woman,
And more prefer the honour of your Country,
Which chiefly you are born for, and may perfect,
The uses you may make of other Nations,
The ripening of your knowledge, conversation,
The full ability, and strength of judgement,
Then any private love, or wanton kisses.
Go worthy man, bring home understanding.
This were an excellent woman to breed School∣men.
For if the Merchant through unknown Seas plough
To get his wealth, then deer sir, what must you
To gather wisdom? go, and go alone,
Only your noble mind for your companion,
And if a woman may win credit with you,
Go far: too far you cannot: still the farther
The more experience finds you: and go sparing,
One meal a week will serve you, and one suit,
Through all your travels: for you'll find it certain,
The poorer and the baser you appear,
The more you look through still.
Dost hear her?
Yes.
What would this woman do if she were suffered,
Upon a new adventure?
Make us nothing,
I wonder that she writes not.
Then when time,
And fullness of occasion have new made you,
And squirt you from a sot into a Signor,
Or nearer from a lade into a courser;
Come home an aged man, as did Ʋlysses,
And I your glad Penelope.
That must have
As many lovers as I languages,
And what she do's with one in the day, in the night
Undo it with an other.
Much that way sir;
For in your absence, it must be my honour,
That, that must make me spoken of hereafter,
To have temptations, and not little ones
Daily and hourly offered me, and strongly,
Almost believed against me, to set off
The faith, and loyalty of her that loves you
What should I do?
Why by my—I would travel,
Did not you mean so?
Alas no, nothing less man:
I did it but to try sir, shoe's the devil,
And now I find it, for she drives me, I must go:
Are my trunks down there, and my horses ready?
Sir, for your house, and if you please to trust me
With that you leave behind.
Bring down the money.
As I am able, and to my poor fortunes,
I'll govern as a widow: I shall long
To hear of your wel-doing, and your profit:
And when I hear not from you once a quarter,
I'll wish you in the Indies, or Cataya,
Those are the climes must make you.
How's the wind?
She'll wish me out of the world anon.
For France.
Tic very fair; get you aboard to night sir,
And loose no time, you know the tide stays no man,
I have cold meats ready for you.
Far thee well.
Thou hast foold me of the Kingdom with a vengeance,
And thoue can fool me in again.
Not I sir,
I love you better, take your time, and pleasure.
Isle see you horsed.
I think thou would see me hanged too,
Were I but half as willing.
Any thing
That you think well of, I dare look upon.
You'll bear me to the lands end Sophocles,
And other of my friends I hope.
Nev'r doubt sir,
You cannot want companions for your good:
I am sure you'll kiss me ere I go; I have business,
And stay long here I must not.
Get thee going.
For if thou tarriest but an other Dialogue
Isle kick thee to thy Chamber.
Far you well Sir,
And bear your self, I do beseech you once more,
Since you have undertaken doing wisely,
Manly, and worthily, tic tor my credit,
And for those flying fems here of your follies,
Your gambols, and ill breeding of your youth,
For which I understand you take this travel,
Nothing should make me leave you else, isle deal
So like a wife, that loves your reputation,
And the most large addition of your credit,
That those shall die: if you want Limon-waters,
Or any thing to take the edge of the Sea off,
Pray speak, and be provided.
Now the Devil,
That was your first good master, shower his blessing
Upon ye all: into whose custody—
I do commit your Reformation,
And so I leave you to your Stilo novo. 
I will go: yet I will not: once more Sophocles
Isle put her to the test.
You had better go.
I will go then: let's seek my father out,
And all my friends to see me fair aboard:
Then women, if there be a storm at Sea,
Worse then your tongues can make, and waves more broken
Then your dissembling faiths are, let me feel
Nothing but tempests, till they crack my Keel.
Now whether I deserve that blame you gave me,
Let all the world discern sir.
If this motion,
(I mean this fair repentance of my Daughter)
Spring from your good persuasion, as it sems so,
I must confess I have spoke too boldly of you,
And I repent.
The first touch was her own,
Taken no doubt from disobeying you,
The second I put to her, when I told her
How good, and gentle yet, with free contrition
Again you might be purchased: loving woman,
She heard me, and I thank her, thought me worthy
Observing in this point: yet all my council,
And comfort in this case, could not so heal her
But that grief got his share too, and she sickend.
I am sorry she's so ill, yet glad her sickness
He's got so good a ground. 
Here comes Moroso.
O you are very welcome,
Now you shall know your happiness.
I am glad on it.
What makes this Lady here?
A dish for you sir
You'll thank me for hereafter.
True Moroso,
Go get you in, and see your Mistress.
She is sick sir,
But you may kiss her whole.
How.
Comfort her.
Why am I sent for sir?
Will you in, and see?
May be she needs confession.
By St. Mary,
She shall have absolution then and penance,
But not above her carriage.
Get you in fool. 
Here comes the other too. 
Now Tranio.
Good even to you too, and you are welcome.
Thank you.
I have a certain Daughter.
Would you had sir.
No doubt you know her well.
Nor never shall sir.
She is a woman, and the ways unto her
Are like the finding of a certain path
After a deep fallen Snow.
Well thats by the by still.
This Daughter that I tell you of is fallen
A little crop sick, with the dangerous surfeit
She took of your affection.
Mine sir?
Yes sir.
Or rather, as it seems, repenting.
And there she lies within, debating on it,
Well sir.
I think it were well you would see her.
If you please sir;
I am not squeamish of my visitation.
But, this isle tell you, she is altered much,
You'll find her now an other Livia.
I have enough of the old sir.
No more fool,
To look gay babies in your eyes young Rowland,
And hang about your pretty neck.
I am glad on it,
And thank my Fates I have escaped such execution,
And bus you till you blush again.
Thats hard sir,
She must kiss shamefully ere I blush at it,
I never was so boyish; well, what follows?
She's mine now, as I please to settle her,
At my command, and where I please to plant her:
Only she would take a kind of farewell of you,
And give you back a wandering vow or two,
You left in pawn; and two or three slight oaths
She lent you too, she looks for.
She shall have 'em
With all my heart sir, and if you like it better,
A free release in writing.
Thats the matter,
And you from her, you shall have an other Rowland,
And then turn tail to tail, and peace by with you.
So be it: your twenty pound sweats Tranio.
Twill not undo me Rowland, do your worst.
Come, shall we see her Sir?
What ere she says
You must bear manly Rowland, for her sickness
Has made he rsomewhat teatish.
Let her talk
Till her tongue ache I care not: by this hand
Thou hast a handsome face wench, and a body
Daintily mounted; now do I feel an hundred
Running directly from me, as I pissed it.
pray draw 'em softly, the least hurry sir
Puts her to much impatience.
How is it daughter?
O very sick, very sick, yet somewhat
Better I hope; a little lightsommer,
Because this goodman has forgiven me;
Pray set me higher; Oh my head:
Well done wench.
Father, and all good people that shall hear me,
I have abused this man perniciously; was never old man humbled so;
I have scorned him, and called him nasty names,
I have spit at him,
Flung Candles ends in's beard, and called him harrow,
That must be drawn to all he dos: contemned him,
For me thought then he was a beastly fellow.
(Oh God my side) a very beastly fellow.
And gave it out, his cassock was a Barge-cloth,
Pound to his predeceffor by a Sculler,
The man yet living: I gave him purging-comfits
At a great christening once,
That spoiled his Chamblet breeches; and one night
I strewd the stairs with peas, as he past down;
And the good Gentleman (woe worth me for it)
Even with his reverent head, this head of wisdom,
Told two and twenty stairs, good and true;
Mist not a step, and as we say verbatim
Fell to the bottom, broke his casting Bottle,
Lost a fair toad-stone of some eighteen shillings,
Jumbled his joints together, had two stools,
And was translated. All this villainy
Did I: I Livia, I alone, untaught.
And I unasked, forgive it.
Whore's Byancha?
Here Cozen.
Give me drink,
There.
Who's that?
Rowland.
O'my dissembler, you and I must part.
Come nearer sir.
I am sorry for your sickness.
Be sorry for your self sir, you have wronged me,
But I forgive you; are the papers ready?
I have'em here: wilt please you view 'em?
Yes.
Show 'em the young man too, I know he's willing
To shift his sails too: tic for his more advancement;
Alas, we might have beggerd one another;
We are young both, and a world of children
Might have been left behind to curse our follies:
We had been undone Byancha, had we married,
Undone for ever: I confess I loved him,
I care not who shall know it, most entirely;
And once, upon my conscience, he loved me;
But farewell that, we must be wiser cousin.
Love must not leave us to the world: have you done?
Yes, and am ready to subscribe.
Pray stay then:
Give me the papers, and let me peruse 'em,
And so much time, as may afford a tear
At our last parting.
Pray retire, and leave her,
Isle call ye presently.
Come Gentlemen, the shower must fall.
Would I had never seen her.
Thou hast done bravely wench.
Pray Heaven it prove so.
There are the other papers: when they come
Begin you first, and let the rest subscribe
Hard by your side; give 'em as little light
As Drapers doe their wares.
Did mark Moroso,
In what an agony he was, and how he cried most
When I abused him most?
That was but reason.
Oh what a stinking thief is this?
Though I was but to counterfeit, he made me
Directly sick indeed. Tames-street to him
Is a mere Pomander.
Let him be hanged.
Amen.
And lie you still.
And once more to your business.
Call 'em in.
Now if there be a power that pities lovers,
Help now, and hear my prayers.
Is she ready?
She has done her lamentations: pray go to her.
Rowland, come near me, and before you seal,
Give me your hand: take it again; now kiss me,
This is the last acquaintance we must have;
I wish you ever happy: there's the paper.
Pray stay a little.
Let me never live more
But I do begin to pity this young fellow;
How heartily he weeps!
There's Pen and Ink sir.
Even here I pray you. Tic a little Emblem
How near you have been to me.
There..
Your hands too,
As witnesses.
By any means
To the book son.
With all my heart.
You must deliver it.
There Livia, and a better love light on thee,
I can no more.
To this you must be witness too.
We will.
Doe you deliver it now.
Pray set me up;
There Rowland, all thy old love back: and may
A new to come exceed mine, and be happy.
I must no more.
Farewell:
A long farewell. 
Leave hereby any means, till this wild passion
Be off her head; draw all the Curtains close,
A day hence you may see her, twil be better,
She is now for little company.
Pray tend her.
I must to horse straight: you must needs along too,
To see my son aboard; were but his wife
As sit for pity, as this wench, I were happy.
Time must do that too: fare ye well; to morrow
You shall receive a wife to quit your sorrow. 
Bring 'em away sirs.
Must the great Trunks go too
Yes, and the Hampers; nay be speedy Masters;
He'll be at Sea before, us else.
O Jaques,
What a most blessed turn hast thou?
I hope so.
To have the Sea between thee and this woman,
Nothing can drown her tongue, but a storm.
By your leave,
We will get us up to Paris with all speed;
For on my soul, as far as Amyens
She'll carry blank; away to Lyon key
And ship 'em presently, we will follow ye.
Now could I wish her in that Trunk:
God shield man,
I had rather have a Bear in it.
Yes, Isle tell ye:
For in the passage if a Tempest take ye,
As many doe, and you lie beating for it,
Then, if it pleased the fates, I would have the Master
Out of a powerful providence, to cry,
Lighten the ship of all hands, or we perish;
Then this for one, as best spared, should by all means
Over-board presently.
Of that condition,
So we were certain to be rid of her,
I would wish her with us: But believe me Pedro,
She would spoil the fishing on this coast for ever,
For none would keep her company, but Dog-fish,
As currish as her self; or Porpisces,
Made to all fatal uses: The two Fish-streets
Were she but once arrived amongst the Whitings,
Would sing a woeful misereri Pedro,
And mourn in poor John, till her memory
Were cast of shore again, with a strong Sea-breach:
She would make god Neptune, and his fire-forke,
And all his demi-gods, and goddesses,
As weary of the Flemmish channel Pedro,
As ever boy was of the school: tic certain,
If she but meet him fair, and were well angered,
She would break his god-head.
Oh her tongue, her tongue.
Rather her many tongues.
Or rather strange tongues.
Her lying tongue.
Her lisping tongue.
Her long tongue.
Her lawless tongue.
Her loud tongue.
And her lickrish —
Many other tongues, and many stranger tongues
Then ever Babel had to tell his ruins,
Were women raised withal; but never a true one.
Home with your stuff again; the journeys ended.
What do's your worship mean?
Your Master, O Petruobio, O poor fellows.
O Jaques, Jaques.
O your, Master's dead,
His body coming back; his wife, his devil;
The griese of— her
Has kilt him?
Kilt him, kilt him.
Is there no law to hang her.
Get ye in,
And let her know her misery, I dare not
For fear impatience seize me, see her more,
I must away again: Bid her for wife-hood,
For honesty, if she have any in her,
Even to avoid the shame that follows her.
Cry if she can: your weeping cannot mend it.
The body will be here within this hour, so tell her;
And all his friends to curse her. Farewell fellows.
O Jaques, Jaques.
O my worthy Moister.
O my most beastly Mistress, hang her.
Split her.
Drown her directly.
Starve her.
Stink upon her.
Stone her to death: may all she eat be Eggs,
Till she run kicking mad for men.
And he,
That man, that gives her remedy, pray Heaven
He may even ipso facto, lose his longings.
Let's go discharge our selves, and he that serves her,
Or speaks a good word of her from this hour,
A seagly curse light on him, which is, Pedro;
The fiend ride through him booted, and spurt, with a Since it's back. 
What a dull ass was I to let her go thus?
Upon my life she loves me still: well Paper,
Thou only monument of what I have had,
Thou all the love now left me, and now lost,
Let me yet kiss her hand, yet take my leave
Of what I must leave every Farewell Livia.
Oh bitter words, Isle read ye once again,
And then for ever study to forget ye.
How's this? let me look better on 't: A Contract?
— a Contract, sealed, and ratified,
Her fathers hand set to it, and Maroso'st
I do not dream sure, let me read again,
The same still: tic a contract.
Tic so Rowlands;
And by the virtue of the same, you pay me
An hundred pound to morrow.
Art sure Tranio,
We are both alive now?
Wonder not, ye have lost.
If this be true, I grant it.
Tic most certain,
There's a Ring for you to, you know it.
Yes.
When shall I have my money?
Stay ye, stay ye,
When shall I marry her?
To night.
Take heed now
You do not trifle me; if you doe,
You'll find more payment, then your money comes to:
Come swear; I know I am a man, and find
I may deceive my self: Swear faithfully,
Swear me directly, am I Rowland?
Yes.
Am I awake?
Ye are.
Am I in health?
As far as I conceive.
Was I with Livia?
You were, and had his contract.
And shall I enjoy her?
Yes, if ye dare.
Swear to all these.
I will.
As thou art honest, as thou hast a conscience,
As that may wring thee if thou lie; all these
To be no vision, but a truth, and serious.
Then by my honesty, and faith, and conscience;
All this is certain.
Let's remove our places.
Swear it again.
By—tic true.
I have lost then, and Heaven knows I am glad out.
Let's go, and tell me all, and tell me how,
For yet I am a Pagan in it.
I have a Priest too,
And all shall come as even as two Testers. 
Set down the body, and one call her out.
You are welcome to the last cast of your fortunes;
There lies your husband, there your loving husband,
There he that was Petruchio, too good for ye;
Your stubborn, and unworthy way has kilt him
Ere he could reach the Sea; if ye can weep,
Now ye have cause begin, and after death
Do something yet to th'world, to think ye honest.
So many tears had saved him, shed in time;
And as they are (so a good mind go with 'em)
Yet they may move compassion.
Pray ye all hear me,
And judge me as I am, not as you covet,
For that would make me ye more miserable:
Tic true, I have cause to grieve, and mighty cause;
And truly and unfeignedly I weep it.
I see there's some good nature yet left in her.
But what's the cause? mistake me not, not this man,
As he is dead, I weep for; Heaven defend it,
I never was so childish: but his life,
His poor unmanly wretched foolish life,
Is that my full eyes pity, there's my mourning.
Dost thou not shame?
I do, and even to water,
To think what this man was, to think how simple,
How far below a man, how far from reason,
From common understanding, and all Gentry,
While he was living here he walked amongst us.
He had a happy turn he dyed; isle tell ye,
These are the wants I weep for, not his person:
The memory of this man, had he lived
But two years longer, had begot more follies,
Then wealthy Autumn flies: But let him rest,
He was a fool, and farewell he; not pitied,
I mean in way of life, or action
By any understanding man that's honest;
But only in's posterity, which I
Out of the fear his ruins might out live him
In some bad issue, like a careful woman,
Like one indeed born only to preserve him,
Denied him means to raise.
Unbutton me,
—I die indeed else? O Maria,
Oh my unhappiness, my misery.
Go to him whore;—if he perish,
Isle see thee hanged my self.
Why, why Maria.
I have done my worst, and have my end, forgive me;
From this hour make me what you please: I have tamed ye,
And now am vowed your servant: Look not strangely,
Nor fear what I say to you. Dare you kiss me?
Thus I begin my new love.
Once again?
With all my heart.
Once again Merry!
O Gentlemen, I Know not where I am.
Get ye to bed then: there you'll quickly know sir.
Never no more your old tricks?
Never sir.
You shall not need, for as I have a faith
No cause shall give occasion.
As I am honest,
And as I am a maid yet, all my life
From this hour since, since ye make so free profession,
I dedicate in service to your pleasure.
I marry, this goes roundly off.
Go Jaques,
Get all the best meat may be bought for money,
And let the hogsheads blood, I am born again:
Well little England, when I see a husband
Of any other Nation stern or jealous,
Isle wish him but a woman of thy breeding,
And if he have not butter to thy bread,
Till thy teeth bleed, isle never trust my travel.
What have we here?
Another morris, sir.
That you must pipe too.
A poor married couple
Desire an offering sir.
Never frown at it,
You cannot mend it now: there's your own hand;
And yours Moroso, to confirm the bargain.
My hand?
Or mine?
You'll find it so.
A trick.
By — a trick.
Yes sir, we tricked ye.
Father.
Hast thou lain with him? speak?
Yes truly sir.
And hast thou done the deed boy?
I have done sir,
That, that will serve the turn, I think.
A match then,
Isle be the maker up of this: Moroso,
There's now no remedy you see, be willing;
For be, or be not, he must have the wench.
Since I am over-reach'd, let's in to dinner,
And if I can Isle drink't away.
That's well said.
Well sirha, you have played a trick, look to it,
And let me be a grandsire within's twelvemoneth,
Or by this hand, Isle curtail half your fortunes.
There shall not want my labour sir: your money;
Here's one has undertaken.
Well, Isle trust her,
And glad I have so good a pawn.
Isle watch ye.
Lets in, and drink of all hands, and be jovial:
I have my colt again, and now she carries;
And Gentlemen, whoever marries next,
Let him be sure he keep him to his Text. 
LAdies to you, in whose defence and right,
Fletchers brave Muse prepared her self to fight
A battle without blood, it was well fought too,
(The victory's yours, though got with much ado.)
We do present this Comedy, in which
A rivulet of pure wit flows, strong and rich
In Fancy, Language, and all parts that may
Add grace and ornament to a merry Play.
Which this may prove. Yet not to go too far
In promises from this our female war,
We do entreat the angry men would not
Expect the mazes of a subtle plot,
Set Speeches, high expressions; and what's worse,
in a true Comedy, politic discourse.
The end we aim at, is to make you sport;
Yet neither gall the City, nor the Court.
Hear, and observe his Comique strain and when
You're sick of melancholy, see it again.
It is no dear Physic, since twill quit the cost:
Or his intentions, with our pains, are lost.
THe Tamer's tamed, but so, as nor the men
Can find one just cause to complain of, when
They fitly do consider in their lives,
They should not reign as Tyrants o'er their wives.
Nor can the women from this president
Insult, or triumph: it being aptly meant,
To teach both Sexes due equality;
And as they stand bound, to love mutually.
If this effect, arising from a cause
Well laid, and grounded, may deserve applause,
We something more then hope, our honest ends
Will keep the men, and women too, our friends.

