THe truth is Peso, so she be a woman
And rich and wholesome, let her be of what
Condition &amp; Complexion it please,
She shall please me I am sure; Those men are fools
That make their eyes their choosers, not their needs.
Me thinks I would have her honest too, &amp; handsome.
Yes if I could have both, but since they are
Wishes so near impossibilities,
Let me have that that may be.
If it were so,
I hope your conscience would not be so nice
To start at such a blessing.
No believe me,
I doe not think I should.
But thou would be
I doe not doubt upon the least suspicion
Unmercifully jealous
No I should not,
For I believe those mad that seek vexations,
A wife, though she be honest, is a trouble,
Had I a wife as fair as Helen was
That drew so many Cuckolds to her cause,
These eyes should see another in my Saddle
Ere I believe my beast would carry double.
So should not I by'r Lady, and I think
My patience (by your leave) as good as yours,
Report would stir me mainly, I am sure on it.
Report? you are unwise; report is nothing;
For if there were a truth in what men talk,
I mean of this kind, this part of the world
I am sure would be no more called Christendom.
What then?
Why Cuckoldome, for we should loose
Our old faiths clean, and hold their new opinions:
If talk could make me sweat, before I would marry,
I'd tie a surer knot, and hang my self;
I tell thee there was never woman yet,
Nor never hope there shall be, though a Saint,
But she has been a subject to men's tongues,
And in the worse sense: and that desperate husband,
That dares give up his peace, and follow humours
(Which he shall find too busy, if he seek'em)
Beside the forcing of himself an Ass
He dyes in chains, eating himself with anger.
Having these Antidotes against opinion
I would marry any one; an arrant whore.
Thou dost not feel the nature of this physic
Which I prescribe not to beget diseases,
But where they are, to stop them.
I conceive ye.
What think thou? thy way of the widow Lily?
Faith thou hast found out one I must confess
Would stagger my best patience: From that woman
As I would bless my self from plagues and surfeits
From men a war at Sea, from storms, and quicksands,
From hearing Treason and concealing it,
From daring of a Madman, or a Drunkard,
From Heresy, ill wine, and stumbling post horse;
So would I pray each morning, and each night
(And if I said each hour, I should not lye)
To be delivered of all these in one,
The woman thou hast named.
Thou hast set her in a pretty Litany.
Pray take my council.
When I am my self
Isle hear you any way; love me though thus
As thou art honest, which I dare not be
Lest I despise my self. Farewell. 
Doe you hear my friend: Sir are you not a setter,
For the fair widow here of famous memory?
Ha? am I taken for a Bawd? oh God
To mine own child too? misery, I thank thee
That keeps me from their knowledge: Sir believe me
I understand ye not.
You love plain dealing.
Are you not parcel Bawd? confess your Function,
It may be we would use it.
Were she worse,
As I fear strangely she is ill enough,
I would not hear this tamely.
Heir's a shilling
To strike good luck withal.
Heir's a Sword Sir
To strike a Knave withal, thou lie, and basely,
Be what thou woult.
Why how now Gentlemen?
You are many: I shall meet you, Sir, again,
And make you understand, you've wronged a woman
Compared with whom thy Mother was a sinner. Farewell. 
He has amazed me.
With a blow?
By'r Lady it was a sound on; are ye good
At taking knocks? I shall know you hereafter:
You wear too blame to tempt a man so far
Before you knew him ce•••in: he has not hurt ye?
No I think.
We were too blame indeed to go so far,
For men may be mistaken: if he had swinged us
H'ad served us right: Beshrew my heart I think,
We have done the Gentlewoman as much wrong too,
For hang me, if I know her
In my particular.
Nor I; this tic to credit
Men's idle tongues; I warrant they have sed
As much by our two mothers.
Like enough.
I see a beating now and then does more
Move and stir up a mans contrition
Then a sharpe Sermon, here probatum est.
What shall I tell your Sister?
Tell her this,
Till she be better conversation'd
And leave her walking by her self, and whining
To her old melancholy Lute, I'll keep
As far from her as the Gallows. 
Who's that Fredrick?
Yes marry is it. O Angelo how dost thou?
Save you Sir, how does my Mistress?
She is in love I think, but not with you.
I can assure you, saw ye Fabritio?
Is he come over?
Yes a week ago: Shall we dine?
I cannot:
Prithee doe.
Believe me I have business.
Have you too, gentlemen?
No sir.
Why then let's dine together:
With all my heart.
Go then: Farewell good Angelo,
Commend me to your friend.
I will. 
Doe not dissemble Franc, mine eyes are quicker
Then such observers, that do ground their faith
Upon one smile or tear; you're much altered,
And are as empty of those Excellencies
That were companions to you; I mean mirth
And free disposure of your blood and Spirit,
As you were borne a mourner.
How I prithee?
For I perceive no such change in my self.
Come, come, this is not wise, nor provident
To halt before a Cripple: If you love
Be liberal to your friend, and let her know it,
I see the way you run, and know how tedious
Twill prove without a true companion.
Sure thou would have me love.
Yes marry would I
I should not please ye else.
And who for gods sake?
For I assure my self, I know not yet:
And prithee Clora, since thou'lt have it so
That I must love, and doe I know not what:
Let him behold a pretty handsome fellow,
And young, and if he be a little valiant
Twill be the better; and a little wise
And faith a little honest.
Well I will sound ye yet for all your craft.
Heigh ho! I'll love no more.
Then one; and him
You shall love Frank.
Which him? thou art so wise
People will take thee shortly for a witch:
But prithee tell me Clora, if I were
So mad as thou would make me, what kind of man
Would thou imagine him?
Faith some pretty fellow?
With a clean strength, that cracks a cudgel well
And dances at a wake, and plays at nine holes.
O God what pretty commendations thou hast given him'
Faith if were in love, as I thank God
I doe not think I am; this short Epistle
Before my love would make me burn the legend.
You are too wilde, I mean some gentleman.
So doe not I, till I can know'em wiser:
Some Gentleman, no Clora, till some Gentleman
Keep some land, and fewer whores believe me
Isle keep no love for him, I doe not long
To go a foot yet, and solicit causes.
What think you then of an adventurer?
I mean some wealthy Merchant.
Let him venture
In some deceit Crare of his own: he shall not
Rig me out, that's the short on it; out upon it:
What young thing of my years would endure
To have her husband in another Country
Within a month after she is married
Chopping for rotten Raysons, and lye pining
At home under the mercy of his fore-man? no,
Though they be wealthy, and indifferent wise
I doe not see that I am bound to love'em.
I see ya're hard to please; yet I will please ye.
Faith not so hard neither, if considered;
What woman may deserve as? she is worthy:
But why do we bestow our ttme so idly?
Prithee let us entertain some other talk,
This is as sickly to me as faint weather.
Now I believe I shall content you Frank,
What think you of a Courtier?
Faith so ill,
That if I should be full, and speak but truth,
'Twold show as if I wanted charity,
Prithee good wench let me not rail upon 'em,
Yet I have an excellent stomach, and must do it;
I have no mercy of these infidels;
Since I am put in mind on it, good bear with me,
Can no man fit you? I will find him out.
This somer fruit, that you call Courtier,
While you continue cold and frosty to him
Hangs fast, and may be found: but when youfling
Too full a heate of your affections —
Upon his root and make him ripe too soon,
Youl' find him rotten 'ith the handling;
His oaths and affections are all one
With his apparel, things to set him off,
He has as many Mistresses, as Faiths,
And all appocripha; his true belief
Is only in a private Surgeon,
And for my single self, I'd sooner venture—
A new conversion of the Jndies,
Then to make Courtiers, able men or honest.
I do believe you love no Courtier,
And by my troth to guess you into love
With any I can think of; is beyond
Either your will, or my imagination.
And yet I am sure you're caught: and I will know him,
Ther's none left now worthy the thinking of;
Unless it be a Soldier, and I am sure,
I would ever bless my self from such a fellow.
Why prithee?
Out upon 'em firelockes,
They are nothing 'ith world, but Buff and Scarlet,
Tough unhewne pieces, to hack swords upon;
I had as lieutenant be courted by a Cannon,
As one of those.
Thou art too malicious,
Upon my faith me thinks they're worthy men.
Say ye so? I'll pull ye on a little further.
What worth can be in those men, whose profession
Is nothing in the world but drink and damn me,
Out of whose violence they are possessed
With legions of unwholesome whores and quarrels;
I am of that opinion, and will dye in it,
There is no understanding, nor can be
In a soust Soldier.
Now it is ignorance
I easily perceive that thus provokes thee,
And not the love of truth; I'll lay my life
If God had made thee man, thou had been a coward.
If to be valiant, be to be a Soldier; I'll tel ye true,
I had rather be a Coward, I am sure with less sin.
This heresy must be looked too in time: for if it spread
Twill grow too pestilent; were I a Scholar
I would so hamper thee for thy opinion,
That ere I left, I would write thee out of credit
With all the world, and make thee not believed
Even in indifferent things; that I would leave thee
A reprobate out of the state of honour.
By all good things, thou hast flung aspersions
So like a fool (for I am angry with thee)
Upon a sort of men; (that let me tell thee
Thy mothers mother would have been a Saint
Had she conceived a Soldier) they are people
(I may commend 'em, while I speak but truth)
Of all the old world, only left to keep
Man as he was, valiant and virtuous:
They are the model of those men, whose honours
We heave our hands at when we hear recited.
They are, and I have all I sought for, it is a soldier
You love, hide it no longer; you have betrayed your self;
Come, I have found your way of commendations,
And what I said, was but to pull it from ye.
It was pretty, are you grown so cunning, Clora?
I grant I love a soldier; But what soldier
Will be a new task to ye? But all this
I doe imagine was but laid to draw me
Out of my melancholy.
I will have the man
Ere I forsake ye.
I must to my chamber.
May not I go along?
Yes, but good wench
Move me no more with these fond questions,
They work like Rubarb with me.
Well, I will not. 
How now? who was that you staid to speak withal.
The old man forsooth.
What old man?
The poor old man that uses to come hither he that you call Father.
Have you dispatched him?
No; he would fine speak with you.
Wilt thou never learn more manners, then to draw in such
Needy rascals to disquiet me? go, answer him I will
Not be at leisure.
He will needs speak with you; and good old man he weeps so,
That by my troth I have not the heart to deny him, pray let you are not in love
Him speak with you.
Lord how tender stomached you are grown of late?
With him, are ye; if ye be, strike up the match; you shall have
Three, l. &amp; a pair of blankets; will ye go answer him?
Pray let him speak with you, he will not away else.
Well, let him in then if there be no remedy; I thank God I am
Able to abuse him, i shall ne'er come clear else of him.
Now Sr. what is your business? pray be short; for I have other
Matters of more moment to call me from ye.
If you but look upon me like a daughter
And keep that love about ye that makes good
A Fathers hope, you'll quickly find my business,
And what I would say to you, and before
I ask, will be a giver: say that sleep,
I mean that love, or be but num'd within ye,
The nature of my want is such a searcher,
And of so mighty power, that where he finds
This dead forgetfulness, it works so strongly,
That if the least heate of a childes affection
Remain unperish'd, like another nature,
It makes all new again; pray do not scorn me,
Nor seem to make your self a greater business
Then my relieving.
If you were not old
I should laugh at ye; what a vengeance ails ye
To be so childish to imagine me
A founder of old fellows? make him drink wench,
And if there be any cold meat in the Buttery,
Give him some broken bread and that, and rid him.
Is this a child's love? or a recompense
Fit for a fathers care? O Lily,
Had I been thus unkind, thou had not been;
Or like me miserable: But it is impossible
Nature should dye so utterly within thee,
And loose her promises; thou art one of those
She set her stamp more excellently on,
Then common people, as fore-telling thee
A general example of her goodness;
Or say she could lye, yet religion
(For love to parents is religious)
Would lead thee right again: Look well upon me
I am the root that gave thee nourishment,
And made thee spring fair, do not let me perish
Now I am old and sapless.
As I live
I like ye far worse now ye grow thus holy,
I grant you are my father; am I therefore
Bound to consume my self and be a beggar
Still in relieving you? I doe not feel
Any such mad compassion yet within me.
I gave up all my state to make yours thus.
It was as ye ought to do, and now ye cry for it
As children do for babies back again.
How would thou have me live?
I would not have ye,
Nor know no reason Fathers should desire
To live, and be a trouble, when children
Are able to inherit, let them dye,
It is sit, and looked for, that they should do so.
Is this your comfort?
All that I feel yet.
I will not curse thee.
If you do I care not.
Pray you give me leave to weep
Why pray take leave,
If it be for your ease.
Thy mother dyed,
Sweet peace be with her, in a happy time.
She did Sir, as she ought to do, would you
Would take the pains to follow; what should you
Or any old man do wearing away
In this world with diseases, and desire
Only to live to make their children scourge-sticks,
And hoard up mill-money? me thinks a marble
Lies quieter upon an old mans head
Then a cold fit a'th palsy.
O good God!
To what an impudence thou wretched woman,
Ha•• thou begot thy self again! well, justice
Will punish disobedience.
You mistake Sir;
Twill punish beggars, fie for shame go work
Or serve, you are grave enough to be a Porter
In some good man of worships house, and give
Sententious answers to the comers in,
A pretty place; or be of some good Consort,
You had a pleasant touch 'ath Cithron once,
If idelnesse have not bereft you of it:
Be any thing but old, and beggarly,
Two sins that ever do out grow compassion;
If I might see you offer at a course
That were a likely one, and showed some proffit,
I would not stick for ten groats, or a noble.
Did I beget this woman?
Nay, I know not:
And 'till I know, I will not thank you for it;
How ever, he that got me had the pleasure,
And that me thinks, is a reward sufficient.
I am so strangely stricken with amazement,
I know not where I am, nor what I am.
You had best take fresh air some where else, twill bring ye
Out of your trance the sooner.
Is all this
As you mean Lily?
Yes believe me is it,
For yet I cannot think you are so foolish,
As to imagine you are young enough
To be my heir, or I so old to make
A Nurse at these years for you, and attend
While you sup up my State in penny pots
Of Malmsey: when I am excellent at Cawdles,
And Cullices. and have enough spare gold
To boyle away, you shall be welcome to me;
'Till when I'd have you be as merry Sir
As you can make your self with that you have,
And leave to trouble me with these relations;
Of what you have been to me, or you are,
For as I hear them, so I loose them; this
For ought I know yet, is me resolution.
Well God be with thee, for I fear thy end
Will be a strange example. 
Fare ye well Sir;
Now would some poor tender hearted fool have wept,
Relented, and have been undone: such children
I thank my understanding I hate truly,
For by my troth I had rather see their tears;
Then feel their pities: my desires and ends
Are all the kindred that I have, and friends. 
Is he departed?
Yes, but heir's another.
Not of his tribe I hope; bring me no more
I would wish you such as he is, If thou see
They look like men of worth, and state, and carry
Ballast of both sides like tall Gentlemen
Admit 'em, but no snakes to poison us
With poverty; wench you must learn a wise rule,
Look not upon the youths of men, and making,
How they descend in blood, nor let their tongues
Though they strike suddenly, and sweet as musique
Corrupt thy fancy: see, and say them fair too,
But ever keep thy self without their distance:
Unless the love thou swallows be a pill,
Gilded to hide the bitterness it brings,
Then fall on without fear wench, yet so wisely
That one encounter cloy him not; nor promise
His love hath made thee more his, then his monies;
Learn this and thrive,
Then let thine honour ever,
(For that's the last rule) be so stood upon,
That men may fairly see
It is want of means, not virtue makes thee fall;
And if you weep twill be a great deal better,
And draw on more compassion, which includes
A greater tenderness of love and bounty;
This is enough at once, digest it well:
Go let him in wench, if he promise proffit,
Not else.
O you are welcome my fair servant,
Upon my troth I have been longing for ye.
This, by her rule should be a liberal man,
I see the best on's may learn every day.
Ther's none come with you.
No.
You do the wiser,
For some that have been here (I name no man)
Out of their malice, more then truth, have done me
Some few ill offices.
How, sweet?
Nay nothing,
Only have talked a little wildely of me;
As their unruly youth directed 'em:
Which though they bite me not, I would have wished
Had light upon some other that deserved 'em.
Though she deserve this of the loosest tongue,
(Which makes my sin the more) I must not see it;
Such is my misery: I would I knew him.
No, no, let him go,
He is not worth your anger: I must chide you
For being such a stranger to your Mistress,
Why would you be so, Servant?
I should chide,
If chiding would work any thing upon you:
For being such a stranger to your Servant,
I mean to his desires: when my dear Mistress,
Shall I be made a happy man?
Fie Servant
What do you mean, unhand me, or by heaven,
I shall be very angry, this is rudeness.
It was but a kiss or two, that thus offends you
It was more I think then you have warrant for.
I am sorry I deserved no more.
You may,
But not this rough way Servant: we are tender,
And ought in all to be respected so;
If I had been your horse, or whore, you might
Back me with this intemperance; I thought
You had loved as worthy men, whose fair affections
Seek pleasures warranted, not pulled by violence,
Do so no more.
I hope you are not angry?
I should be with another man, I am sure,
That durst appear but half thus violent.
I did not mean to ravish ye
You couldot.
You are so willing—
How?
Me thinks this shadow,
If you had so much shame as fits a woman:
At least of your way, Mistress, long ere this
Had been laid of to me that understand ye.
That understand me? Sir ye understand,
Nor shall no more of me then modesty,
Will without fear deliver to a stranger;
You understand I am honest; else I tell ye
(Though you were better far then Iulio)
You, and your understanding are two fools,
But were we Saints, thus we are still rewarded.
I see that woman had a pretty catch on it,
That had made you the Master of a kindnesses,
She durst not answer openly; o me!
How easily we women may be cozened?
I took this Iulio as I have a faith,
(This young dissembler with the sober vizard)
For the most modest tempered Gentleman,
The coolest, quietest, and best companion;
For such an one I could have wished a woman.
You have wished me ill enough a conscience,
Make me no worse for shame: I see the more
I work by way of service to obtain ye
You work the more upon me. Tell me truly
(While I am able to believe a woman,
For if you use me thus, that faith will perish)
What is your end, and whether will you pull me?
Tell me, but tell me that I may not start at,
And have a cause to curse ye.
Bless me goodness!
To curse me did you say Sir? let it be
For too much loving you then, such a curse
Kill me withal and I shall be a Martyr;
You have found a new way to reward my doting,
And I confess a fit one for my folly,
For you your self if you have good within ye,
And dare be Master of it, know how deadly
This hart has held you ever; oh good God!
That I had never seen that false mans eyes,
That dare reward me thus with fears and curses,
Nor never heard the sweetness of that tongue,
That will when this is known, yet cozen women:
Curse me good Iulio, curse me bitterly,
I do deserve it for my confidence,
And I beseech thee, if thou hast a goodness
Of power yet in thee to confirm thy wishes,
Curse me to earth; for what should I do here
Like a decaying flower, still withering
Under his bitter words, whose kindly heate
Should give my poor hart life? No, curse me Iulio,
Thou can not do me such a benefit
As that, and well done, that the heavens may hear it.
Oh fair tears were you but as chaste, as subtle,
Like Bones of Saints, ye would work miracles;
What were these women to a man that knew not
The thousand, thousand ways of their deceiving?
What riches had he found? Oh he would think
Himself still dreaming of a blessedness,
That like continual spring should flourish ever.
For if she were as good as she is seeming,
Or like an Eagle could renew her virtues,
Nature had made another world of sweetness;
Be not so grieved sweet Mistress, what I sed
You do, or should know, was but passion;
Pray wipe your eyes and kiss me; take these trifles,
And wear them for me, which are only rich
When you will put them on; Indeed I love ye,
Beshrew my sick hart, if I grieve not for ye.
Will you dissemble still? I am a fool,
And you may easily rule me, if you flatter,
The sin will be your own.
You know I doe not.
And shall I be so childish once again,
After my late experience of your spite
To credit you? you doe not know how deep
(Or if you did, you would be kinder to me,)
This bitterness of yours have struck my heart.
I pray no more.
Thus you would doe I warrant,
If I were married to you.
Married to me?
Is that your end?
Yes, Is not that the best end,
And as all hold, the noblest way of love?
Why doe you look so strange Sir? doe not you
Desire it should be so?
Stay.
Answer me.
Farewell. 
I, are you there? are all these tears lost then?
Am I so overtaken by a fool
In my best days and tricks? my wise fellow
Isle make you smart for it as I am a woman,
And if thou be not timber, yet Isle warm thee:
And is he gon?
Yes.
He's not so lightly struck
To be recovered with a base repentance,
I should be sorry then: Fortune I prithee
Give me this man but once more in my arms,
And if I loose him, women have no charms. 
SEigneur, What think you of this sound of wars?
As only of a sound; they that intend
To doe are like deep waters that run quietly
Leaving no face of what they were behind 'em,
This rumour is too common and too loud
To carry truth.
Shall we never live to see
Men look like men again,
Upon a march?
This cold dull rusty peace makes us appear
Like empty Pictures, only the faint shadows
Of what we should be:
Would to God my Mother
Had given but half her will to my begetting
And made me woman, to sit still and sing,
Or be sick when I list, or any thing
That is too idle for a man to think of:
Would I had been a whore 'thad been a course
Certain, and of my conscience of more gain
Then two commands, as I would handle it:
Faith I could wish I had been any thing
Rather then what I am, a Soldier
A Career, or a Cobbler, when I knew
What it was to wear a Sword first; for their trades
Are and shall be a constant way of life,
While men send cheeses up, or wear out buskins.
Thou art a little too impatient,
And make thy anger a far more vexation
Then the not having wars: I am a Soldier
Which is my whole Inheritance, yet I
Though I could wish a breach with all the world
If not dishonourable, I am not so malicious,
To curse the fair peace of my Mother Country;
But thou want money; and the first supply
Will bury these thoughts in thee.
Pox a peace.
It fills the Kingdom full of holidays,
And only feeds the wants of whores and pipers;
And make the idle drunken Rogues, get Spinsters.
It is true I may want money, and no little,
And almost clothes too: of which if I had both
In full abundance: yet against all peace,
That brings up mischief thicker then a shower,
I would speak louder then a Lawyer;
By heaven it is the surfeit of all youth,
That makes the toughness, and the strength of nations
Melt into women. It is an ease that broods
Thieves, and bastards only.
This is more,
(Though it be true) then we ought to lay open,
And seasons only of an indiscretion,
Believe me Captain such distempered spirits
Once out of motion, though they be proof valiant,
If they appear thus violent and fiery,
Breed but their own disgraces; and are nearer
Doubt, and suspect in Princes, then rewards.
It is well they can be near 'em any way,
But call you those true spirits, ill affected
That whilst the wars were, served like walls and ribs,
To girdle in the Kingdom?
And now fallen
Through a faint peace into affliction,
Speak but their miseries? come, come, Fabritio
You may pretend what patience ye please,
And seem to yoke your wants like passions;
But while I know thou art a Soldier,
And a deserver, and no other harvest
But what thy Sword reapes for thee to come in,
You shall be pleased to give me leave to tell ye,
You wish a Devil of this musty peace:
To which prayer,
As one that's bound in conscience, and all
That love our trade, I cry, Amen.
Prithee no more, we shall live well enough,
There's ways enough besides the wars to men
That are not loggs, and lye still for the hands
Of others to remove 'em.
You may thrive Sir,
Thou art young and handsome yet, and well enough
To please a widow: thou can sing, and tell
These foolish love-tales; and indite a little,
And if need be, compile, a pretty matter
And dedicate it to the honourable,
Which may a waken his compassion,
To make ye Clarke a'th kitchen, and at length
Come to be married to my Ladies woman,
After she's cracked 'ith ring.
It is very well Sir.
But what dost thou think shall become of me,
With all my imperfections? let me dye
If I think I shall ever reach above
A forlorn Tipster, or some frothy fellow,
That stincks of stale beer.
Captain Jacamo,
Why should you think so hardly of your virtues?
What virtues? by this light I have no virtue,
But down right buffeting: what can my face
That is no better then a ragged Map now
Of where I have marched and travelled profit me?
Unless it be for Ladies to abuse, and say
It was spoiled for want of a Bongrace when I was young,
And now twill make a true prognostication
Of what man must be? Tell me of a fellow
That can mend noses, and complain,
So tall a soldier should want teeth to his stomach?
And how it was great pity, that it was,
That he that made my body, was so busied
He could not stay to make my legs too? but was driven
To clap a pair of cat-skins to my knees, for which
I am indebted to two Schoole-boyes? this
Must follow necessary.
Ther's no such matter.
Then for my morals, and those hidden pieces,
That art bestows upon me, they are such
That when they come to light: I am sure will shame me.
For I can neither write, nor read, nor speak
That any man shall hope to proffet by me,
And for my Languages, they are so many
That put them altogether, they will scarce
Serve to beg single beer in: the plain truth is,
I love a Soldier, and can lead him on,
And if he fight well I dare make him drunk:
This is my virtue, and if this will do
I'll scramble yet amongst 'em.
It is your way
To be thus pleasant still, but fear not man
For though the wars fail, we shall screw our selves
Into some course of life yet.
Good Fabritio,
Have a quick eye upon me, for I fear
This peace will make me something that I love not;
For by my troth though I am plain and dudgeon,
I would not be an Ass: and to sell parcels,
I can as soon be hanged; prithee bestow me
And speak some little good, though I deserve not.
Come we'll consider more: stay, this
Should be another winde-fall of the wars.
He looks indeed like an old tater'd Colours,
That every wind would borrow from the Staff;
These are the hopes we have for all our hurts:
They have not cast his tongue too.
They that say
Hope never leaves a wretched man that seeks her,
I think are either patient fools, or liars,
I am sure I find it so, for I am mastered,
With such a misery and grief together
That that stayed Anchor men lay hold upon
In all their needs, is to me lead that bows,
Or breaks, with every strong sea of my sorrows.
I could now question heaven, (were it well
To look into their justice) why those faults,
Those heavy sins, other provoke 'em with
Should be rewarded on the heads of us,
That hold the least alliance to their vices?
But this would be too curious; for I see
Our suffering, not disputing, is the end,
Revealed to us of all these miseries.
Twenty such holy Hermits in a Camp,
Would make 'em all Carthusians, I'll be hanged
If hee know what a whore is: or a health,
Or have a nature liable to learn,
Or so much honest nurture to be drunk.
I do not think he has the spleen to swear
A greater oath then Sempsters utter Sockes with,
S'pur him a question.
They are strangers both
To me, as I to them I hope: I would not have
Me and my shame together known by any,
I'll rather lye my self unto another.
I need not ask you Sir your Country,
I hear you speak this tongue: pray what more are ye?
Or have you been? if it be not offensive
To urge ye so far, misery in your years,
Gives every thing a tongue to question it.
Sir, though I could be pleased to make my ills
Only mine own, for grieving other men,
Yet to so fair and courteous a demander
That promises compassion, at worst, pity,
I will relate a little of my story.
I am a Gentleman, however thus
Poor and unhappy; which believe me sir
Was not borne with me: for I well have tried
Both the extremes of fortune; and have found
Both dangerous: my younger years provoked me,
Feeling in what an case I slept at home,
Which to all stirring spirits is a sickness,
To see far Countries, and observe their Customs.
I did so; and I travelled till that course
Stored me with language, and some few slight manners,
Scarce worth my money; when an each possessed me
Of making arms my active end of travel.
But did you so?
I did; and twenty winters
I wore the Christian Cause upon my sword
Against his enemies, at Bud siege
Full many a cold night have I lodged in armour
When all was frozen in me but mine honour:
And many a day, when both the Sun and Canon
Strove, who should most destroy us: have I stood
Malld up in steel, when my rough sinews shrunk,
And this parched body ready to consume
As soon to ashes, as the pike I bore:
Want has been to me as another nature,
Which makes me with this patience still profess it;
And if a Soldier may without vaine-glory
Tell what he has done, believe me Gentlemen
I could turn over annals of my dangers:
With this poor weakness have I manned a breach,
And made it firm with so much blood, that all
I had to bring me off alive was anger.
Thrice was I made a slave, and thrice redeemed
At price of all I had; The miseries
Of which times, if I had a heart to tell,
Would make ye weep like children; But I'll spare ye
Fabricio, we two have been soldiers
Above these fourteen years, yet a my conscience
All we have seen, compared to his experience
Has been but cudgel-play, or Cock-fighting.
By all the faith I have in arms, I reverence
The very poverty of this brave fellow:
Which were enough it self, and his to strengthen
The weakest town against half Christendom.
I was never so ashamed of service
In all my life before, now I consider
What I have done; and yet the rogues would swear
I was a valiant fellow; I do find
The greatest danger I have brought my life through,
Now I have heard this worthy, was no more
Then stealing of a May-pole, or at worst,
Fighting at single billet with a Barge-man.
I do believe him Jacamo.
Believe him?
I have no faith within me, if I doe not.
I see they are soldiers?
And if we may judge by affections
Brave and deserving men: how they are stirred
But with a mere relation of what may be?
Since I have won belief, and am not known,
Forgive me honour, i'll make use of thee.
Sir would I were a man, or great, or able
To look with liberal eyes upon your virtue.
Let's give him all we have, and leave off prating:
Here Soldier, there's even five months pay: be merry,
And get thee handsome cloths.
What mean you Jacamo?
Ye are a fool.
The very story's worth a hundred pound.
Give him more money.
Gentlemen, I know not
How I am able to deserve this blessing.
But if I live to see fair days again,
Something i'll doe in honour of your goodness,
That shall show thankfulness, if not desert.
If you please Sir, till we procure ye place,
To eat with us, or wear such honest garments
As our poor means can reach to, you shall be
A welcome man; to say more, were to feed ye
Only with words; we honour what you've been,
For we are soldiers, though not near the worth
You spake of lately.
I do guess ye so,
And knew, unless he were a soldier,
He could not find the way to know my wants.
But me thinks all this while you're too temperate;
Do you not tell men sometimes of their dullness
When you are grip't, as now you are with need?
I do, and let them know those silks they wear
The War weaves for 'em: and the bread they eat
We sow, and reap again to feed their hunger:
I tell them boldly, they are masters of
Nothing but what we fight for: their fair women
Lye playing in their arms, whilst we like Lares
Defend their pleasures: I am angry too,
And often rail at these forgetful great men
That suffer us to sue for what we ought
To have flung on us, ere we ask.
I have
Too often told my griefs that way, when all
I reaped, was rudeness of behaviour;
In their opinions men of War that thrive,
Must thank 'em when they rail: and wait to live.
Come Sir, I see your wants need more relieving,
Then looking what they are: pray go with us.
I thank you Gentlemen: since you are pleased
To do a benefit, I dare not cross it,
And what my service or endeavours may
Stand you in need, you shall command, not pray.
So you shall us; i'll to the Taylors with you bodily
Well, if this be true; I'll believe a woman
When I have nothing else to do.
It is certain; if there be a way of truth,
In blushes, smiles, and commendatious;
For by this light, have heard her praise you fellow
In such a pitch, as if sh'ad studied
To crowd the words of all men into him,
And I imagine these are seldom used
Without their special ends, and by a maid
Of her desires and youth.
It may be so.
She's free as you or I am, and may have
By that prerogative, a liberal choice
In the bestowing of her love.
Bestowing?
If it be so, she has bestowed her self
Upon a trim youth: Peso, what do you call him?
Why, Captain Jacamo.
O Captain Jack-boy,
That is the Gentleman.
I think he be
A Gentleman at worst.
So think I too,
Would he would mend Sir.
And a tall one too.
Yes of his teeth; for of my faith I think
They are sharper then his sword, and dare do more
If the Beuffe meet him fairly.
Very well.
Now do I wonder what she means to doe
When she has married him.
Why well enough,
Trail his pike under him, and be a Gentlewoman
Of the brave Captains company.
Doe you hear me?
This woman is my sister, Gentlemen.
I am glad she is none of mine: but Frederick,
Thou art not such a fool sure to be angry
Unless it be with her; We are thy friends man.
I think ye are.
Yes faith, and do but tell thee
How she will utterly orethrow her credit,
If she continue gracing of this pot-gun.
I think she was bewitched, or mad, or blind,
She would never have taken such a scar-crow else
Into protection: of my life he looks
Of a more rusty swarth complexion
Then an old arming doublet.
I would send
His face to the Cutlers then, and have it sanguined,
Twill look a great deal sweeter; then his nose
I would have shorter, and my reason is,
His face will be ill mounted else.
For his body,
I will not be my own Judge, least I seem
A railer, but let others look upon it,
And if they find it any other thing
Then a trunke-seller, to send wines down in,
Or a long walking-bottle, I'll be hanged for it:
His hide, (for sure he is a beast) is ranker
Then the Muscovy leather: and grained like it.
And by all likelihoods he was begotten
Between a stubborn pair of winter boots.
His body goes with straps, he is so churlish.
Hoe's poor and beggarly besides all this:
And of a nature far incapable
Of any benefit: for his manners cannot
Show him a way to thank a man that does one,
He's so uncivil: you may do a part
Worthy a brother, to persuade your sister
From her undoing: if she prove so foolish
To marry this cast Captain, look to find her
Within a month, where you, or any good man
Would blush to know her: selling cheese and prunes,
And retailed bottle ale: I grieve to think
Because I loved her, what a march this Captain
Will set her into.
You are both, believe me,
Two arrant Knaves; and were it not for taking
So just an execution from his hands
You have belied thus, I would swaddle ye,
Till I could draw off both your skins like scaberds.
That man that you wronged thus, though to me
He be a stranger, yet I know, so worthy,
However low in fortune, that his worst parts,
The very wearing of his cloths, would make
Two better Gentlemen then you dare be,
For there is virtue in his outward things.
Belike you love him then.
Yes marry do I.
And will be angry for him.
If you talk
Or pull your face into a stich again,
As I love truth I shall be very angry.
Do not I know thee, though thou hast some land
To set thee out thus among Gentlemen,
To be a prating and vain-glorious ass?
I do not wrong thee now, for I speak truth.
Doe not I know thou hast been a cudgeled coward,
That has no cure for shame but cloth of silver?
And think the wearing of a gaudy suite
Hides all disgraces?
I understand you not, you hurt not me
Your anger flies so wide.
Signeur Frederick,
You much mistake this Gentleman.
No Sir.
If you would please to be less angry,
I would tell you how.
You had better study Sir
How to excuse your self if ye be able,
Or I shall tell you once again.
Not me Sir;
For I protest what I have said, was only
To make you understand your sisters danger.
He might if it pleased him conceive it so.
I might if it pleased me stand still and hear
My sister made a may-game, might I not?
And give allowance to your liberal jests
Upon his person, whose least anger would
Consume a legion of such wretched people,
That have no more to justify their actions
But their tongues ends? that dare lye every way
As a mill grinds? From this hour I renounce
All part of fellowship that may hereafter
Make me take knowledge of ye, but for Knaves;
And take heed, as ye love whole skins, and coxcombs,
How, and to whom ye prate thus; for this time
I care not if I spare ye: do not shake,
I will not beat ye, though ye doe deserve it
Richly.
This is a strange course Frederick;
But sure you do not, or you would not know us,
Beat us?
It is somewhat low Sir, to a Gentleman.
I'll speak but few words, but I'll make 'em truths;
Get you gone both, and quickly, without murmuring,
Or looking big: and yet before you go
I will have this confessed, and seriously,
That you two are two rascals.
How?
Two Rascals.
Come speak it from your hearts, or by this light
My sword shall fly among ye; answer me,
And to the point directly.
You shall have
Your will for this time: since we see you're grown
So far intemperate; Let it be so Sir
In your opinion.
Do not mince the matter,
But speak the words plain; and you Lodovick
That stand so tally on your reputation,
You shall be he shall speak it.
This is pretty,
Let me not stay upon it.
Well we are rascals,
Yes Peso, we are rascals. 
Get ye gone now, not a word more, you're rascals.
That should be Frederick.
It is he: Frederick?
Who's that?
A friend Sir.
It is so, by the voice
I have sought you Gentlemen, and since I have found you,
So near our house, I'll force ye stay a while,
I pray let it be so.
It is too late,
We'll come and dine to morrow with your sister,
And do our services.
Who were those with you?
We met two came from hence:
Two idle fellows,
That you shall beat hereafter, and I'll tell ye
Some fitter time a cause sufficient for it.
But Frederick, tell me truly; do you think
She can affect my friend?
No certainer
Then when I speak of him, or any other,
She entertains it with as much desire
As others do their recreations.
Let not him have this light by any means;
He will but think he's mocked, and so grow angry,
Even to a quarrel: he's so much distrustful
Of all that take occasion to commend him—
Women especially: for which he shuns
All conversation with 'em, and believes
He can be but a mirth to all their Sex.
Whence is this musique?
From my sisters chamber.
The touch is excellent' let's be attentive.
Hark, are the weights abroad?
Be softer prithee,
It is private music.
What a din it makes?
I had rather hear a Jews-trump then these Lutes,
They cry like Schoole-boyes.
Prithee Jacamo.
Well I hear, or sleep, I care not whether.
TEll me dearest what is Love?
It is a lightning from above,
It is an arrow, it is a fire,
It is a boy they call Desire.
It is a grave,
Gapes to have
Those poor fools that long to prove.
Tell me more, are women true?
Yes, some are, and some as you.
Some are willing, some are strange,
Since you men first taught to change.
And till troth
Be in both,
All shall love, to love anew.
Tell me more yet, can they grieve?
Yes, and sicken sore, but live:
And be wise, and delay,
When you men are as wise as they.
Then I see
Faith will be,
Never till they both believe.
Clora, come hither; who are these below there?
Where?
There.
Ha? I should know their shapes
Though it be darkish; there are both our brothers,
What should they make thus late here?
What's the tother?
What tother?
He that lies along there.
O, I see him
As if he had a branch of some great Pedigree
Grew out on's belly.
Yes.
That should be,
If I have any knowledge in proportion.—
They see us.
It is no matter.
What a log
Is this, to sleep such musique out?
No more let's hear 'em.
If I have any knowledge in proportion,
The Captain Jacamo, those are his legs
Upon my conscience.
By my faith, and neat ones.
You mean the boots, I think they are neat by nature,
As thou art knavish, would I saw his face!
It would scare you in the dark.
A worse then that
Has never scared you Clora to my knowledge.
It is true, for I never have seen a worse;
Nor while I say my prayers heartily,
I hope I shall not.
Well, I am no tell tale:
But is it not great pity, tell me Clora,
That such a brave deserving Gentleman
As every one delivers this to be,
Should have no more respect, and worth flung on him
By able men? Were I one of these great ones,
Such virtues should not sleep thus.
Were he greater
He would sleep more I think: I'll waken him.
Away ye fool.
Is he not dead already, and they two taking order
About his Blacks? me thinks they are very busy,
A fine clean coarse he is: I would have him buried
Even as he lies, cross legged, like one of the Templers
(If his west-phaly gammons will hold crossing)
And on his breast, a buckler with a pike in it,
In which I would have some, learned Cutler
Compile an Epitaph, and at his feet
A musket, with this word upon a Labell
Which from the cocks mouth thus should be delivered,
I have discharged the office of a Soldier.
Well, if thy Father were a Soldier
Thus thou would use him.
Such a Soldier,
I would indeed.
If he hear this, not all
The power of man could keep him from the windows
•ill they were down and all the doors broke open:
For Gods sake make her cooler: I dare not venture
To bring him else: I know he will go to buffets
Within five words with her, if she holds this spirit;
Let's waken him, and away, we shall hear worse else.
Well if I be not even with thee Clora
L•t m• be hanged for this: I know thou dost it
Only to anger me, and purge your wit
Which would break out else.
I have found ye,
Isle be no more cross, bid'em good night
No, no, they shall not know, we have seen'em;
Shut the window. 
Will you get up Sir?
Have you paid the Fiddlers?
You are not left to doe it: Fie upon thee,
Hast thou forsworn manners?
Yes unless
They would let me eat my meat without long graces
Or drink without a preface to the pledger;
Oft will it please you, shall I be so bold sir
Let me remember your good bedfellow,
And lye and kiss my hand unto my Mistress
As often as an Ape does for an Apple;
These are mere Schisms in Soldiers; wher's my friend?
These are to us as bitter as purgations,
We love that general freedom we are bred to;
Hang these faint fooleries, they smell of peace,
Doe they not friend?
Faith Sir to me they are
As things indifferent, yet I use'em not,
Or if I did, they would not prick my conscience.
Come, shall we go? it is late.
Yes any whether,
But no more Music, it has made me dull.
Faith any thing but drinking disturbs thee Jacomo
We'll even to bed.
Content.
Thou wilt dream of wenches.
I never think of any I thank God
But when I am drunk, and then tic but to cast
A cheap way how they may be all destroyed
Like vermin; let's away I am very sleepy.
I, thou art ever so, or angry, come. 
I Will but see her once more Angilo
That I may hate her more, and then I am
My self again.
I would not have thee tempt lust,
Tic away dangerous, and will deceive thee
Had thou the constancy of all men in thee.
Having her sins before me, I dare see her
Were she as catching as the plague, and deadly,
And tell her she is fouler then all those
And far more pestilent, if not repentant,
And like a strong man, chide her well, and leave her.
It is easily said, of what complexion is she?
Make but a curious frame unto thy self
As thou would shape an Angel in thy thought
Such as the Poets, when their fancies sweat
Imagine Iuno is, or fair eyed Pallas
And one more excellent, then all those figures
Shalt thou find her; shees browne, but of a sweetness,
(If such a poor word may express her beauty)
Believe me Angilo would doe more mischief
With a forced smile, then twenty thousand Cupids
With their love quivers, full of Ladies eyes,
And twice as many flames, could fling upon us.
Of what age is she?
As a Rose at fairest,
Neither a bud, nor blown, but such a one,
Were there a Hercules to get again
With all his glory, or one more then he
The god would choose out amongst a race of women
To make a mother of; she is outwardly
All that bewitches sense; all that entises,
Nor is it in our virtue to uncharme it.
And when she speaks, oh Angilo, then music
(Such as old Orpheus made, that gave a soul
To aged mountains, and made rugged beasts
Lay by their rages; and tall trees that knew
No sound but tempests, to bow down their branches
And hear, and wonder; and the Sea, whose surges
Shook their white heads in heaven, to be as midnight
Still, and attentive; steals into our souls
So suddenly, and strangely, that we are
From that time no more ours but what she pleases.
Why look, how far you have thrust your self again
Into your old disease? are you that man
With such a resolution, that would venture
To take your leave of folly, and now melt
Even in repeating her?
I had forgot me.
As you will still doe.
No, the strongest man
May have the grudging of an ague on him,
This is no more; let's go, I would fine be fit
To be thy friend again, for now I am no mans.
Go you, I dare not go, I tell you truly
Nor were it wise I should.
Why?
I am well.
And if I can, will keep my self so.
Ha? thou make me smile, though I have little cause,
To see how prettily thy fear becomes thee;
Art thou not strong enough to see a woman?
Yes, twenty thousand: but not such a one
As you have made her; Isle not lye for'th matter:
I know I am frail, and may be cozened too
By such a Siren.
Faith thou shalt go, Angilo
Faith but I will not; no I know how far Sir
I am able to hold out, and will not venture
Above my depth: I doe not long to have
My sleep taken from me, and go pulingly
Like a poor wench had lost her market money;
And when I see good meat, sit still and sigh,
And call for small beer; and consume my wit
In making Anagrams, and faithful poses;
I doe not like that Itch, I am sure I had rather
Have the maine pox, and safer.
Thou shalt go,
I must needs have thee as a witness with me
Of my repentance; as thou love me go.
Well I will go, since you will have it so,
But if I prove a fool too, look to have me
Curse you continually, and fearfully.
And if thou see me fall again, good Angilo
Give me thy council quickly least I perish.
Pray God I have enough to save my self,
For as I have a soul, I had rather venture
Upon a savage Island, then this woman. 
From whom Sir, comes this bounty? for I think
You are mistaken.
No Sir, it is to you,
I am sure my Mistress sent it.
Whose your Mistress,
That I may give her thanks?
The virtuous Widow,
The virtuous widow Sir? I know none such:
Pray what's her name?
Laelia.
I knew you erred
It is not to me I warrant ye; there Sir,
Carry it to those she feeds fat with such favours,
I am a stranger to her.
Good Sir take it,
And if you will, I'll swear she sent it to you,
For I am sure mine eye never went off ye
Since you forsook the Gentlemen you talked with
Just at her door.
Indeed I talked with two
Within this half hour in the street.
It is you Sir,
And none but you I am sent to: wiser men
Would have been thankful sooner, and received it,
It is not a fortune every man can brag of,
And from a woman of her excellence.
Well Sir, I am Chatechiz'd; what more belongs to 't?
This only Sir; she would entreat you come
This evening to her without fail.
I will.
You guess where.
Sir I have a tongue else. 
She is down-right Devil; or else my wants
And her disobedience have provoked her
To look into her foul self, and be sorry.
I wonder how she knew me? I had thought
I had been the same to all, I am to them
That changed me thus: God pardon me for lying,
For I have paid it home: many a good man
That had but found the profit of my way
Would forswear telling true again in hast.
Here are my praters; now if I did well
I should be labour 'em, but I have found
A way to quiet 'em, worth a thousand on it.
If we could get a fellow that would do it.
What villainy is now in hand?
Twill be hard to be done in my opinion
Unless we light upon an English-man
With seven-score surfeits in him.
Are the English-men such stubborn drinkers?
Not a leake at Sea
Can suck more liquor; you shall have their children
Christened in mulled sack, and at five years old, able
To knock a Dane down: Take an English-man
And cry St. George, and give him but a rasher,
And you shall have him upon even terms
Defy a hogshead; such a one would do it
Home boy, and like a work-man: at what weapon?
Sherry sack: I would have him drink stark dead,
If it were possible: at worst past pottage.
What is the end then?
Dost thou not perceive it?
If he be drunk dead, ther's a fair end of him.
If not, this is my end, or by enticing,
Or by deceiving, to conduct him where
The fool is, that admires him; and if sober,
His nature be so rugged, what wilt be
When he is hot with wine? come lets about it,
If this be done but handsomely, I'll pawn
My head she hath done with soldiers.
This may do well.
Here's a new way to murder men alive,
I'll choke this train: God save ye Gentlemen.
It is to you, stay: yes it is to you.
What's to me?
You are fortunate,
I cannot stand to tell you more now, meet me
Here soon, and you'll be made a man. 
What Vision's this?
I know not.
Well, I'll meet it,
Think you ot'h other, and let me a while
Dream of this fellow.
For the Drunkard, Lodowicke,
Let me alone.
Come, let's about it then. 
Ha, ha, ha, pray let me laugh extremely.
Why? prithee why? hast thou such cause?
Yes faith, my brother will be here straightway, &amp;—
What?
The other party: ha, ha, ha.
What party?
Wench thou art not drunk.
No faith.
Faith thou hast been among the bottles Clora;
Faith but I have not Frank: Prithee be handsome,
The Captain comes along too, wench.
O is that it?
That tickles ye.
Yes, and shall tickle you too,
You understand me?
By my troth thou art grown
A strange lewd wench: I must even leave thy company,
Thou wilt spoil me else.
Nay, thou art spoiled to my hand;
Had thou been free, as a good wench ought to be,
When I went first a birding for thy Love,
And roundly said, that is the man must doe it,
I had done laughing many an hour ago.
And what dost thou see in him, now thou know him,
To be thus laughed at?
Prithee be not angry
And I'll speak freely to thee.
Doe, I will not.
Then as I hope to have a handsome husband,
This fellow in mine eye, and Frank I am held
To have a shrewd guess at a pretty fellow,
Appears a strange thing.
Why how strange for Gods sake?
He is a man, and one that may content
(For any thing I see) a right good woman:
And sure I am not blind.
There lies the question?
For, but you say he is a man, and I
Will credit you, I should as soon have thought him
Another of Gods creatures; out upon him,
His body, that can promise nothing
But laziness and long strides.
These are your eyes;
Where were they Clora, when you fell in love
With the old foot-man, for singing of Queen Dido?
And swore he looked in his old velvet trucks
And his sliced Spanish Jerkin, like Don Iohn?
You had a parlous judgment then, my Clora.
Who told you that?
I heard it.
Come, be friends,
The Soldier is a Mars, no more, we are all
Subject to slide away.
Nay, laugh on still.
No faith, thou art a good wench, and it is pity
Thou should not be well quarred at thy entering,
Thou art so high flown for him: Look, whose there?
Prithee go single, what should I do there,
Thou know I hate these visitations,
As I hate peace or perry.
Wilt thou never
Make a right man?
You make a right fool of me
To lead me up and down to visit women,
And be abused and laughed at; let me starve
If I know what to say, unless I ask 'em
What their shoes cost?
Fie upon thee, coward,
Can thou not sing?
Thou know I can sing nothing
But Plump•on park.
Thou't be bold enough,
When thou art entered once.
I had rather enter
A breach: If I miscarry, by this hand
I will have you by the ears for it.
Save ye Ladies.
Sweet brother I dare swear, you're welcome hither,
So is your Friend;
Come, blush not, but salute 'em.
Good Sir believe your Sister; you are most welcome,
So is this worthy Gentleman whose virtues
I shall be proud to be acquainted with.
She has found me out already, and has paid me;
Shall we be going?
Peace;
Your goodness Lady
Will ever be before us, for my self
I will not thank you single, lest I leave
My friend, this Gentleman, out of acquaintance.
More of me yet?
Would I were able Sir,
From either of your words to merit thanks.
But brother, is your friend thus sad still? me thinks
It is an unseemly nature in a Soldier.
What hath she to do with me, or my behaviour?
He do's but show so, prithee to him Sister.
If I do not break thy head, I am no Christian,
If I get off once.
Sir, we must entreat you
To think your self more welcome, and be merry,
It is pity a fair man of your proportion
Should have a soul of sorrow.
Very well;
Pray Gentlewoman what would you have me say?
Do not you know Sir?
Not so well as you
That talk continually.
You have hither, Sir.
I thank him, so he has,
Fair fall his sweet face for it.
Let my face
Alone, I would wish you, least I take occasion
To bring a worse in question.
Meaning mine?
Brother, where was your friend brought up? he has sure
Been a great lover in his youth of pottage,
They lye so dull upon his understanding.
No more of that, thou'lt anger him at heart.
Then let him be more manly, for he looks
Like a great School-boy that had been blown up
Last night at dust-point.
You will never leave
Till you be told how rude you are, fie Clora.
Sir will it please you sit?
And I'll sit by you.
Woman be quiet, and be ruled I would wish you.
I have done, Sir Captain.
Art thou not ashamed?
You are an ass, I'll tell you more anon.
You had better ha been hanged then brought me hither.
You are grown a sullen fool; either be handsome,
Or by this light I'll have wenches bait thee;
Go to the Gentlewoman, and give her thanks,
And hold your head up; what?
By this light I'll brain thee.
Now ô my faith this Gentleman do's nothing
But it becomes him rarely; Clora, look
How well this little anger, if it be one,
Shows in his face.
Yes, it shows very sweetly.
Nay do not blush Sir, ô my troth it does,
I would be ever angry to be thus.
Fabritio, ô my conscience if I ever
Do fall in love, as I will not forswear it
Till I am something wiser, it must be,
I will not say directly with that face,
But certainly, such another as that is,
And thus dispose my chance to hamper me.
Dost thou hear this, and stand still?
You will prate still;
I would you were not women, I would take
A new course with ye.
Why courageous?
For making me a stone to whet your tongues on.
Prithee sweet Captain.
Go, go spin, go hang.
Now could I kiss him.
If you long for kicking,
You're best come kiss me, do not though, I'd wish ye,
I'll send my Foot-man to thee, he shall leap thee,
And thou want horsing: I'll leave ye Ladies.
Beshrew my heart you are unmannerly
To offer this unto a Gentleman
Of his deserts, that comes so worthily
To visit me, I cannot take it well.
I come to visit you, you foolish woman?
I, though you did Sir, and for that I thank you,
I would be loath to loose those thanks; I know
This is but some odd way you have, and faith
It do's become you well to make us merry;
I have heard often of your pleasant vein.
What would thou ask more?
Pray thou scurvy fellow
Thou hast not long to live; adieu dear Damsels,
You silthy women farewell, and be sober,
And keep your chambers.
Farewell old Don Diego.
Away, away, you must not be so angry,
To part thus roughly from us; yet to me
This do's not show, as if it were yours, the wars
May breed men something plain I know,
But not thus rude; give me your hand good Sir
I know it is white, and—
If I were not patient,
What would become of you two prating housewives?
For any thing I know, we would in to supper,
And there begin a health of lusty Claret
To keep care from our hearts, and it should be—
Faith to whom? Mark but this Jacamo.
Even to the handsomest fellow now alive.
Do you know such a one?
He may be guest at,
Without much travel.
There's another item.
And he should be a Soldier.
It would be better.
And yet not you sweet Captain
Why not he?
Well; I shall live to see your husbands beat you,
And hiss 'em on like ban-dogs.
Ha, ha, ha.
Green sicknesses and serving-men light on ye
With greasy Codpieces, and woollen stockings,
The Devil (if he dare deal with two women)
Be of your counsels: Farewell Plaisterers— 
This fellow will be mad at Mid-sumer
Without all doubt.
I think so too.
I am sorry
Hoe's gone in such a rage; but sure this holds him
Not every day.
Faith every other day
If he come near a woman.
I wonder how his mother could endure
To have him in her belly he's so boisterous.
He's to be made more tractable I doubt not.
Yes, if they taw him as they do whit-leather
Upon an iron, or beat him soft like Stock-fish.
Art sure it is he?
Yes, and another with him.
The more the merrier; did you give that money
And charged it to be delivered where I showed you?
Yes, and what else you bad me.
That brave fellow,
Though he be old, what ever he be, shows toughness,
And such a one I long for, and must have
At any price; these young soft melting gristles
Are only for my safer ends.
They are here.
Give me my veil, and bid the boy go sing
That song above, I gave him: the sad Song:
Now if I miss him, I am cursed, go wench
And tell 'em I have utterly forsworn
All company of men; yet make a venture
At last to let 'em in; thou know these things,
Doe 'em to'th life.
I warrant you I am perfect.
Some ill woman for her use would give
A million for this wench, she is so subtle.
Good Sir desire it not, I dare not do it,
For since your last being here, Sir, believe me
She has grieved her self out of all company,
And (sweet soul) almost out of life too.
Prithee,
Let me but speak one word.
You will offend Sir
And yet your name is more familiar with her
Then any thing but sorrow, good Sir go.
This little varlet hath her lesson perfect,
These are the baits they bob with.
Faith I will not.
I shall be chidden cruelly for this;
But you are such a Gentleman—
No more.
There's a new Tyre-wench; peace, thou art well enough.
What, has she musique?
Yes; for Gods sake stay,
It is all she feeds upon.
Alas poor soul.
Now will I pray devoutly, for there's need ont.
AWay delights, go seek some other dwelling,
For I must dye.
Farewell false Love, thy tongue is ever telling
Lye after lye.
For ever let me rest now from thy smarts,
Alas, for pity go,
And fire their hearts
That have been hard to thee, mine was not so.
Never again deluding love shall know me,
For I will dye:
And all those griefs that think to over-grow me
Shall be as I.
For ever will I sleep, while poor maids cry,
Alas for pity stay
And let us dye
With thee, men cannot mock us in the day.
Mistress? not one word, Mistress if I grieve ye
I can depart again.
Let's go then quickly,
For if she get from under this dark cloud,
We shall both sweat I fear for it.
Do but speak
Though you turn from me, and speak bitterly,
And I am gone, for that I think will please you.
Oh that all women were thus silent ever,
What fine things they were.
You have looked on me,
When (if there be belief in women's words
Spoken in tears) you swore you loved to do so.
O me my heart!
Now Julio play the man,
Or such another will undo thee:
Would I had any thing to keep me busy
I might not hear her; think but what she is,
Or I doubt mainly, I shall be in the mash too.
Pray speak again;
Where is my woman?
Here.
Mercy upon me! what a face she has?
Would it were veiled again.
Why did you let
This flattering man in to me? did not I
Charge thee to keep me from his eyes again,
As carefully as thou would keep thine own?
Thou hast brought me poison in a shape of heaven
Whose violence will break the hearts of all,
Of all weak women, as it has done mine,
That are such fools to love, and look upon him.
Good Sir be gone, you know not what an ease
Your absence is.
By heaven she is a wonder,
I cannot tell what it is, but I am squeamish.
Though I desire to be here more then heaven
As I am now, yet if my sight offend you,
So much I love to be commanded by you
That I will go: Farewell—
I should say something
Ever you depart, and I would have you hear me:
But why should I speak to a man that hates me?
And will but laugh at any thing I suffer?
If this be hate—
Away, away deceiver.
Now help me Angilo!
I am worse then thou art.
Such tears as those might make another woman
Believe thee honest Julio: almost me
That know their ends, for I confess they stir me.
What will become of me? I cannot go now
If you would hang me, from her: o brave eye!
Steal me away for Gods sake Julio.
Alas poor man! I am lost again too strangely.
No, I will sooner trust a Crocodile
When he sheds tears, for he kills suddenly,
And ends our cares at once; or any thing
That's evil to our natures, then a man;
I find there is no end of his deceivings,
Nor no avoiding 'em, if we give way:
I was requesting you to come no more,
And mock me with your service, it is not well,
Nor honest to abuse us so far: you may love too;
For though, I must confess I am unworthy
Of your love every way: yet I would have you
Think I am somewhat too good to make sport of.
Will you believe me?
for your vows and oaths,
And such deceiving tears as you shed now,
I will as you doe, study to forget 'em.
Let me be most despised of men—
No more;
There is no new way left, by which your cunning
Shall once more hope to catch me; no, thou false man
I will avoid thee, and for thy sake all
That bear thy stamp; as counterfeit in love.
For I am open eyed again, and know thee.
Go, make some other weep, as I have done,
That dare believe thee: go, and swear to her
That is a stranger to thy cruelty,
And knows not yet what man is, and his lyings,
How thou di'st daily for her: pour it out
In thy best lamentations; put on sorrow,
As thou can, to deceive an Angel, Julio,
And vow thy self into her heart, that when
I shall leave off, to curse thee for thy falsehood,
Still a forsaken woman may be found,
To call to heaven for vengeance.
From this hour,
I heartily despise all honest women;
I care not if the world took knowledge on it,
I see there's nothing in them, but that folly
Of loving one man only: give me henceforth
(Before an greatest blessing can be thought of)
If this be one, a whore; that's all I aim at.
Mistress, the most offending man is heard
Before his sentence, why will you condemn me
Ever I produce the truth to witness with me
How innocent I am of all your angers?
There is no trusting of that tongue, I know it,
And how far if it be believed it kills; no more Sir.
It never lied to you yet; if it did
It was only when it called you mild and gentle.
Good Sir no more; make not my understanding
After I have suffered thus much evil by you,
So poor to think I have not reached the end
Of all your forced affections; yet because
I once loved such a sorrow too too dearly,
As that would strive to be; I do forgive ye
Even heartily, as I would be forgiven,
For all your wrongs to me; my charity
Yet loves you so far, (though again I may not)
And wish when that time comes, you will love truly
(If you can ever doe so) you may find
The worthy fruit of your affections,
True love again, not my unhappy harvest,
Which like a fool I sowed in such a heart
So dry and stony, that a thousand showers
From these two eyes, continually raining,
Could never ripen.
You've conquered me:
I did not think to yield, but make me now,
Even what you will my Lily, so I may
Be but so truly happy to enjoy you.
No, no, those fond imaginations,
Are dead and buried in me, let 'em rest.
I'll marry you.
The Devil thou wilt Iulio
How that word wakened me? come hither friend,
Thou art a fool, look steadfastly upon her
Though she be all that I know excellent
As she appears, though I could fight for her,
And run through fire; though I am stark mad too
Never to be recovered, though I would
Give all I had l'th world to lye with her
Even to my naked soul, I am so far gone,
Yet me thinks still we should not dote away
That that is something more then ours, our honours
I would not have thee marry her by no means,
Yet I should do so; is she not a whore?
She is; But such a one—
It is true, she's excellent,
And when I well consider, Iulio
I see no reason we should be confined
In our affections; when all creatures else
Enjoy still where they like.
And so will I then,
He's fast enough I hope now, if I hold him.
You must not do so though, now I consider
Better what it is.
Do not consider Angilo,
For I must do it.
No I'll kill thee first.
I love thee so well that the worms shall have thee
Before this woman, friend.
I was your counsel.
As I was a knave,
Not as I loved thee.
All this is lost upon me Angilo,
For I must have her: I will marry ye
When you please; pray look better on me.
Nay then no more friend; farewell Iulio,
I have so much discretion left me yet
To know, and tell thee thou art miserable.
Stay thou art more then she, and now I find it.
Is he so?
Mistress.
No, I'll see thee starved first. 
Friend.
Fly her as I do, Iulio, she's a witch.
Beat me away then, I shall grow here still else.
That were the way to have me grow there with thee
Farewell for ever. 
Stay, I am uncharmed,
Farewell thou cursed house, from this hour be
More hated of me then a Leprosy. 
Both gon? a plague upon 'em both,
Am I deceived again? Oh I would rail
And follow 'em; but I fear the spite of people,
'Till I have emptied all my gall; the next
I seize upon, shall pay their follies
To the last penny; This will work me worse
He that comes next, by heaven shall feel their curse. 
O ye are a sweet youth, so uncivilly
To rail and run away?
O are you there Sir?
I am glad I have found ye, you have not now your Ladies
To show your wit before.
Thou woult not, woult he?
What a sweet youth I am, as you have made me,
You shall know presently.
Put up your sword
I have seen it often, it is a Fox.
It is so,
And you shall feel it too; will you dispatch Sir?
And leave your mirth out? or I shall take occasion
To beat ye, and disgrace you too.
Well since, there is no other way to deal with you
Let's see your sword, I am sure you scorn all odds,
I will fight with you —
How now? 
Nay stand out,
Or by this light I'll make ye.
This is scurvy
And out of fear done.
No Sir out of judgement,
For he that deals with thee, you're grown so boisterous
Must have more wits, or more lives then another,
Or always be in Armour, or enchanted;
Or he is miserable.
Your end of this Sir?
My end is only mirth to laugh at thee,
Which now I'll do in safety; ha, ha, ha.
Shart? then I am grown ridiculous.
Thou art,
And wilt be shortly sport for little children,
If thou continue this rude stubbornenesse.
O God, for any thing that had an edge?
Ha, ha, ha.
Fie, what a shame it is,
To have a lubber show his teeth?
Ha, ha.
Why dost thou laugh at me thou wretched fellow?
Speak with a pox; and look ye render me
Just such a reason —
I shall dye with laughing.
As no man can find fault with: I shall have
Another Sword; I shall ye flooring puppy.
Does not this testiness show finely in thee?
Once more take heed of children, if they find thee
They'll break up school, to bear thee company,
Thou wilt be such a pastime, and whoo'te at thee:
And call thee bloody bones, and Spade, and Spitfire,
And Gaffer Madman; and go by Ieronimo,
And will with wisp and come aloft, and crack rope,
And old Saint Dennis with the dudgeon Codpeeece:
And twenty such names.
No I think they will not.
Yes but they will: and Nurses still their children
Only with thee, and •ere take him Iacanio.
Gods precious, That I were but over thee
One Steeple height: I would fall and break thy neck.
This is the reason I laugh at thee,
And while thou art thus, will do: tell me one thing.
I wonder how thou durst thus question me,
Prithee restore my Sword.
Tell me but one thing,
And it may be I will: Nay Sir; keep out
Well I will be your fool now, speak your mind Sir.
Art thou not breeding Teeth?
How? Teeth?
Yes Teeth, thou would not be so froward else.
Teeth?
Come, twill make thee
A little reumatique, but that's all one,
Weel'e have a Bib, for spoiling of thy doublet;
And a fringed Muckender, hang at thy girdle,
I'll be thy Nurse, and get a Coral for thee:
And a fine Ring of Bells.
Faith this is somewhat
Too much Fabritio, to your friend that loves you;
Me thinks your goodness, rather should invent,
A way to make my follies less, then breed 'em;
I should have been more moderate to you,
But I see ye despise me.
Now I love ye,
There, take your Sword, continue so: I dare not
Stay now to try your patience, Soon I'll meet ye,
And as you love your honours, and your state,
Redeem your self well to the Gentlewoman,
Farewell 'till soon. 
Well I shall think of this. 
Nothing 'ith world but a dri'd Tongue or two—
Taste him and tell me.
Is a valiant wine,
This must be he mine Host.
This shall be Ipse,
Oh he 's a devilish bitten wine, a Tyrant;
Where he lays hold Sir, This is he that scorns
Small Beer should quench him, or a foolish Caudell
Bring him to bed; no if he flinch I'll shame him,
And draw him out to mull amongst old Midwives.
There is a Soldier, I would have thee better
Above the rest, because he thinks there's no man
Can give him drink enough.
What kind of man?
That thou may know him perfectly, hoe's one
Of a left-handed making, a lanck thing,
As if his belly were tan up with straw,
To hunt a match.
Has he no beard to show him?
Faith but a little; yet enough to note him,
Which grows in parcels here, and there a remnant:
And that thou moist not miss him, he is one
That wears his fore-head in a valet scabbard.
That note's enough, he's mine, I'll fuddle him
Or lye 'ith sudds; you will be here too?
Yes, till soon, farewell and bear up.
If I do not,
Say I am recreant; I'll get things ready.
It is strange thou should be thus, with thy discretion
I am sure I am so.
I am well you see.
Keep your self warm then, &amp; go home, &amp; sleep,
And pray to God thou moist continue so;
Would I had gon to'th Devil of an arrant,
When I was made a fool to see her: Leave me
I am not fit for conversation.
Why, thou art worse then I was.
Therefore leave me,
The nature of my sickness is not eased
By company, or council, I am mad,
And if you follow me with questions
Shall show my self so.
This is more then error.
Pray be content, that you have made me thus,
And do not wonder at me.
Let me know, but what you mean to do and I am gon
I would be lo'ath to leave you thus else.
Nothing
That needs your fear, that is sufficient;
Farewell, and pray for me.
I would not leave you.
You must and shall.
I will then: would yon woman
Had been ten fathom under ground, when first
I saw her eyes.
Yet she had been dangerous,
For to some wealthy Rock of precious stone,
Or mine of gold as tempting, her fair body
Might have been turned; which once found out by labour
And brought to use, having her spells within it,
Might have corrupted States, and ruined Kingdoms
Which had been fearful (Friend) Go, when I see thee
Next, I will be as thou art, or no more.
Pray do not follow me, you'll make me angry.
Heaven grant you may be right again.
Amen. 
Score a gallon of Sack, and a pint of Olives to the Unicorn.
Why drawer?
A non, a non.
Look into the Nags head there.
Score a quart of Claret to the Bar,
And a pound of Sausages into the flower-pott.
The Divell's in their throats, anon, anon.
Mull a pint of Sack there for the women in the Flower-deluce, &amp; put in ginger enough, they belch like potguns,
And Robin fetch Tobacco for the Peacock, they will not
Drunk till midnight else: how now how does my Master.
Faith he lies drawing on a pace.
That's an ill sign.
And fumbles with the pots too.
Then ther's no way but one with him.
All the rest.
Except the Captain are in Limbo patrum,
Where they lye sod in sack.
Does he bear up still.
Before the wind still, with his lights up bravely
All he takes in I think he turns to Iuleps,
Or has a world of Stooge in his belly,
The rest look all like fire-drakes, and lye scattered
Like rushes round about the room. My Master
Is now the louing'st man, I think above ground,
Would he were always drunk then.
Drawer.
Anon, anon Sir,
And swears I shall be free to morrow, and so vveeps
And calls upon my Mistress.
Then he's right.
And svvears the Captain must lye this night with her
And bad me break it to her with discretion,
That he may leave an issue after him:
Able to entertain a dutch Ambassador,
And tells him feelingly how sweet she is,
And how he stool her from her friends in the Country;
And brought her up disguised with the Carriers,
And was nine nights bereaving her her maiden head,
And the tenth got a dravver, here they come.
 Anon, anon, speak to the Tiger, Peter.
Ther's my Bells boys, my silver Bell.
Would he were hanged
As high as I could ring him.
Captain.
Hoe Boy.
Robin, sufficient single Beer, as cold as crystal,
Quench Robin, quench.
I am gon Sir.
Shall we bear up still? Captain how I love thee?
Sweet Captain let me kiss thee, by this hand
I love thee next to Malmesey in a morning,
Of things transitory.
I love thee too, as far as I can love a fat man.
Dost thou Captain?
Sweetly? and heartily?
With all my heart Boy.
Then welcome death, come close mine eyes sweet Captain
Thou shalt have all.
What shall your wife have then?
Why she shall have besides my blessing, and a silver spoon
Enough to keep her stirring in the world,
Three little Children, one of them was mine
Upon my conscience, the other two are Pagans.
It were good she had a little foolish money,
To rub the time a way with.
Not a rag,
Not a Denier, no let her spin a Gods name:
And raise her house again,
Thou shalt not dye though,
Boy see your Master safe delivered,
He's ready to lye in.
God night.
God morrow,
Drink tell the Cow come home, it is all paid boys.
A pox of Sack.
Marry God bless my Buts, Sack is a jewel,
It is comfortable Gentlemen.
More Beer boy.
Very sufficient single Beer.
Here Sir.
How is it Gentlemen?
But even so, so.
Go before finely Robin, and prepare
My wife, bid her be right and straight, I come boy
And Sirha, if they quarrel let 'em use,
Their own discretions, by all means, and stir not,
And he that's killed shall be as sweetly buried;
Captain, adieu, adieu sweet bully Captai no,
One kiss before I dye, one kiss.
Farewell Boy.
All my sweet boys farewell. 
Go sleep, you are drunk.
Come Gentlemen, I'll see you at your Lodging,
You look not lustily, a quart more.
No Boy.
Get us a Torch.
It is day Sir.
That's all one.
Are not those the stars, thou scurvy Boy?
Is not Charle-waine there, tell me that, there?
Yes;
I have paid 'em truly: do not vex him Sirha.
Confess it Boy, or as I live I'll beat
Midnight into thy brains.
I do confess it.
Then live, and draw more small Beer presently.
Come Boys, let's hug together, and be loving,
And sing, and do brave things cheerely my hearts,
A pox a being sad; now, could I fly
And turn the world about upon my finger,
Come ye shall love me, I am an honest fellow:
Hang care and fortune, we are friends.
No Captain.
Do not you love me? I love you too dearly.
No by no means; you are a fighting Captain,
And kill up such poor people as we are, by the dozens.
As they kill flies with Fox-tailes, Captain.
Well Sir.
Me thinks now as I stand, the Captain shows,
To be a very merciful young man.
(And prithee Peso, let me have thy opinion)
Then he shall have mercy, that merciful is,
Or all the Painters are Apocrypha.
I am glad you have your wits yet, will ye go?
You had best say we are drunk.
Ye are.
Ye lye.
You're Rascals, drunken rascals.
It is sufficient.
And now I'll tell you why, before I beat ye,
You have been tampering any time these three days,
Thus to disgrace me.
That's a lye too.
Well Sir,
Yet I thank God I have turned your points on you,
For which I'll spare ye somewhat, half a beating.
I'll make you fart fire Captain, by this hand,
And ye provoke, do not provoke I'd wish you.
How do you like this?
Sure I am enchanted.
Stay till I draw.
Despatch then, I am angry.
And thou shalt see how suddenly In kill thee.
Thou dare not draw, ye cold, tame, mangy Cowards
Ye drunken Rogues, can nothing make you valiant?
Not wine, nor beating?
If this way be suffered
It is very well.
Go ther's your way, go and sleep:
I have pity on you, you shall have the rest
To morrow when wee meet.
Come Lodowick,
Hoe's monstrous drunk now, ther's no talking with him.
I am so, when I am sober, I'll do more. 
Boy wher's mine Host?
Hoe's on his bed a sleep Sir. 
Let him alone then: Now am I high proof
For my action, now could I fight bravely,
And charge into a wilde fire; or I could love
Any man living now, or any woman,
Or indeed any creature that loves Sack
Extremely, monstrously; I am so loving,
Just at this instant, that I might be brought
I feel it, with a little labour, now to talk
With a justice of peace, that to my nature
I hate next an ill Sword: I will do
Some strange brave thing now, and I have it here:
Pray God the ayre keep out; I feel it buzzing. 
She loves him too much, that's the plain truth Fredrick
For which if I might be believed, I think her
A strange forgetter of her self; ther's Iulio,
Or twenty more—
In your eye I believe you,
But credit me the Captain is a man:
Lay but his rough affections by, as worthy.
So is a resty Jade, a horse of service,
If he would leave his nature, give me one
By your leave Sir to make a husband of
Not to be weaned, when I should marry him;
Me thinks a man is misery enough,
You are too bitter,
I would not have him worse.
Yet I shall see you hampered one day Lady,
I do not doubt it, for this heresy
I'll burn before; come prithee leave this sadness;
This walking by thy self to see the Devil,
This mumps, this Lachrimae, this love in sippets;
It fits thee like a French-hood.
Does it so?
I am sure it fits thee to be ever talking,
And nothing to the purpose, take up quickly;
Thy wit will founder of all four else wench,
I thou hold this pace; take up when I bid thee.
Before your Brother fly?
I can endure it.
Heir's Raw-head come again; Lord how he looks?
Pray God we scope with broken pates.
Were I hee,
Thou should not want thy wish, he has been drinking
Has he not Fredrick?
Yes but do not find it.
Peace and let's hear his wisdom.
You will mad him.
I am somewhat bold, but that's all one.
A short and pithy saying of a Soldier.
As I live
Thou art a strange mad wench.
To make a parson.
Ladies I mean to kiss ye
How he wipes his mouth like a young Preacher;
We shall have it.
In order as you lie before me; first
I'll begin with you.
With me Sir?
Yes
If you will promise me to kiss in ease.
I care not if I venture.
I will kiss according to mine own inventions
As I shall see cause; sweetly I would wish you,
I love ye.
Do you Sir?
Yes indeed do I,
Would I could tell you how.
I would you would Sir.
I would to God I could, but it is sufficient,
I love you with my heart.
Alas poor heart.
And I am sorry; but we'll talk of that,
Hereafter if it please God.
Even when you will Sir.
Hoe's dismal drunk, would he were musled.
You
I take it are the next.
Go to him fool.
Not I, he will bite me.
When wit? when?
Good Captain.
Nay, and you play boa-peepe; I'll ha, no mercy
But catch as catch may.
Nay, I'll not defend ye.
Good Captain do not hurt me, I am sorry
That ere I angered ye.
I'll tew you for it
By this hand wit, unless you kiss discreetly.
No more Sir.
Yes a little more sweet wit,
One taste more of your office: go thy ways
With thy small kettle Drums; upon my conscience
Thou art the best, that ever man laid his leg o'er.
He smells just like a Cellar,
Fie upon him.
Sweet Lady now to you.
For loves sake kiss him.
I shall not keep my countenance.
Try prithee.
Pray be not coy sweet woman, for I'll kiss ye,
I am blunt
But you must pardon me.
O God my sides.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
Why ha, ha, ha? why laugh?
Why all this noise sweet Ladies?
Lusty Laurence,
See what a Gentlewoman you have saluted;
Pray God she prove not quick.
Where were thine eyes
To take me for a woman, ha, ha, ha.
Who art he, art he mortal?
I am Fredrick
Then Fredrick is an Ass,
A scurvy Fredrick to laugh at me.
Sweet Captain.
A way woman;
Go stich and serve God, I despise thee woman,
And Fredrick shall be beaten; S'blood ye Rogue
Have you none else to make your puppies of, but me?
I prithee be more patient
Ther's no hurt done.
S'blood but there shall be, Scab.
Help, help for loves sake.
Whose within there?
So now you have made a fair hand.
Why?
You have killed me— 
Call in some Officers, and stay the Captain.
You shall not need.
This is your drunkenness.
O me unhappy Brother, Fredrick,
Look but upon me, do not part so from me,
Set him a little higher he is dead.
O villain, villain. 
How now what's the matter?
O Sir my Brother! o my dearest Brother!
This drunken trough has killed him.
Killed him?
Yes.
For heaven God sake hang him quickly, he will do
Every day such a murder else. there is nothing
But a strong Gallows that can make him quiet,
I find it in his nature too late.
Pray be quiet,
Let me come to him.
Some go for a Surgeon.
Oh what a wretched woman has he made me!
Let me alone good Sir.
To what a fortune,
Hast thou reserved thy life.
Fabritio.
Never entreat me, for I will not know thee,
Nor utter one word for thee, unless it be
To have thee hanged; for God sake bee more temperate.
I have a sword still, and I am a villain.
&amp;c. Hold, hold, hold.
Ha?
Away with him for heavens sake
He's too desperate for our enduring.
Come, you shall sleep, come strive not
Isle have it so, here take him to his lodging, and
See him laid before you part.
We will Sir.
Ne'er wonder, I am living yet, and well,
I thank you sister for your grief, pray keep it
Till I am fitter for it.
Do you live Sir?
Yes, but it was time to counterfeit, he was grown
To such a madness in his wine.
It was well Sir,
You had that good respect unto his temper,
That no worse followed.
If I had stood him, certain one of us must have perished,
How now Frank?
Beshrew my heart I tremble like an aspen.
Let him come here no more for heavens sake
Unless he be in chains.
I would fine see him
After he has slept, Fabritio, but to try
How he will be; chide him, and bring him back.
You'll never leave till you be worried with him.
Come brother, we'll walk in, and laugh a little.
To get this Fever off me.
Hang him squib,
Now could I grind him into priming powder.
Pray will you leave your fooling?
Come, all friends. 
Thou art enough to make an age of men so,
Thou art so cross and peevish.
I will chide him,
And if he be not graceless, make him cry for it.
I would go a mile (to see him cry) in slippers
He would look so like a whey cheese;
Would we might see him once more.
If you dare
Venture a second trial of his temper
I make no doubt to bring him.
No good Frank
Let him alone, I see his vain lies only
For falling out at Wakes and Bear-baitings,
That may express him sturdy.
Now indeed
You are too sharp sweet sister, for unless
It be this sin, which is enough to drown him,
I mean this sourness, he's as brave a fellow,
As forward, and as understanding else
As any He that lives.
I doe believe you,
And good Sir when you see him, if we have
Distasted his opinion any way,
Make peace again.
I will: I'll leave ye Ladies.
Take heed you had best, he has sworn to pay you else.
I warrant you, I have been often threatened.
When he comes next, I'll have the cough or tooth-ach,
Or something that shall make me keep my chamber,
I love him so well.
Would you would keep your tongue. 
I cannot keep from this ungodly woman,
This Lily, whom I know too, yet am caught,
Her looks are nothing like her; would her faults
Were all in Paris print upon her face,
Cum Privilegio, to use 'em still.
I would write an Epistle before it, on the inside of her masque
And dedicate it to the whore of Babilon, with a preface upō
Her nose to the gentle Reader; &amp; they should be to be sold
At the sign of the Whores head in the pottage pot, in what
Street you please: But all this helps not me;—I
Am made to be thus caught, past any redress, with a thing
I contemn too.
I have read Epictetus twice over against the
Desire of these outward things, and still her face runs in
My mind, I went to say my prayers, and they were
So laid out of the way, that if I could find any prayers I
Had, I'm no Christian.
This is the door, and the short
Is, I must see her again.— 
Who's there?
It is I, I would speak with your Mistress.
Did she send for you?
No, what then? I would see her, prithee by thy leave.
Not by my leave; for she will not see you, but doth hate you, and
Your friend, and doth wish you both hanged, which being so proper
Men, is great pity, that you are not.
How's this?
For your sweet self in particular, who she resolves persuaded your
Friend to neglect her, she deems whip-cord the most
Convenient unction for your back and shoulders.
Let me in, I'll satisfy her.
And if it shall happen that you are in doubt of these my speeches,
Insomuch that you shall spend more time in arguing at the
Door, I am fully persuaded that my Mistress in person from
Above, will utter her mind more at large by way of
Urine upon your head, that it may sink the more soundly
Into your understanding faculties.
This is the strangest thing, good pretty soul, why dost thou use me so?
I pray thee let me in sweet heart.
Indeed I cannot sweet-heart.
Thou art a handsome one, and this crosseness do's become thee.
Alas I cannot help it.
Especially to me; thou know when I was here, I said I liked thee of
All thy Mistress servants.
So did I you, though it be not my fortune to express
It at this present: for truly if you would cry, I cannot
Let you in.
Pox on her, I must go the down-right way: look you
Here is ten pound for you, let me speak with her.
I like your gold well, but it is a thing by heaven
I cannot doe, she
Will not speak with you, especially at this time, she has affairs.
This makes her leave her jesting yet, but take it
And let me see her, bring me to a place
Where undiscerned of herself I may
Feed my desiring eyes but half an hour.
Why faith I think I can, and I will stretch my wits
And body too for gold: if you will swear as you
Are gentle, not to stir, or speak, where you shall
See or hear, now, or hereafter: give me your gold, I'll plant you
Why, as I am a Gentleman, I will not.
Enough, quick, follow me.
Why whore's this maid, she he's much care of her business. Nil?
I think she be sunk;—why Nil—whiew—
Whats the matter?
I pray you heartily come away, oh, come, come, the Gentleman,
My Mistress invited, is coming down the street, and the banquet
Not yet brought out?— 
Nil, Sirha?
I come forsooth.
Now must I walk: when ther's any fleshly matters in hand, my
Mistress sends me of a four hours errand: but if I go not
About mine own bodily business as well as she, I am a Turk. 
What, all wide open? It is the way to sin
Doubtless; but I must on; the gates of hell
Are not more passable then these; how they
Will be to get out, God knows, I must try.
It is very strange, if there be any life
Within this house, would it would show it self.
What's here? a Banquet? and no mouth to eat,
Or bid me do it? this is something like
The entertainment of adventurous Knights
Entering enchanted Castles: For the manner
Though there be nothing dismal to be seen
Amazes me a little; what is meant
By this strange invitation? I will sound
My Daughters meaning, ever I speak to her,
If it be possible, for by my voice— 
She will discover me! hark, whence is this.
COme hither you that love, and hear me sing
of joys still growing
Green, fresh, and lusty, as the pride of Spring,
and ever blowing.
Come hither youths that blush, and dare not know
what is desire,
And old men worse then you, that cannot blow
one spark of fire.
And with the power of my enchanting Song,
Boys shall be able men, and old men young.
Come hither you that hope, and you that cry,
leave off complaining,
Youth, strength, and beauty, that shall never dye,
are here remaining.
Come hither fools, and blush, you stay so long
from being blessed,
And mad men worse then you, that suffer wrong,
Yet seek no rest.
And in an hour, with my enchanting Song,
You shall be ever pleased, and yovng maids long.
Sir you are welcome hither, as this kiss
Given with a larger freedom then the use
Of strangers will admit, shall witness to you.
Put the gown on him, in this chair sit down;
Give him his slippers: be not so amazed,
Here's to your health, and you shall feel this wine
Stir lively in me, in the dead of night.
Give him some wine; fall to your banquet Sir,
And let us grow in mirth; though I am set
Now thus far off you, yet four glasses hence
I will sit here,
And try, till both our bloods
Shoot up and down to find a passage out,
Then mouth, to mouth will we walk up to bed,
And undress one another as we go;
Where both my treasure, body, and my soul
Are yours to be disposed of.
Umh, umh.— 
You are old,
Is that your meaning? why, you are to me
The greater novelty, all our fresh youth
Are daily offered me, though you perform
As you think little, yet you satisfy
My appetite: from your experience
I may learn something in the way of lust
I may be better for. But I can teach
These young ones;
But this day I did refuse
A pair of 'em, Julio, and Angilo,
And told them they were as they were
Raw fools and whelps.
Pray God he speak not
Why speak you not sweet Sir?
Umh.— 
Peace there, that musique, now Sir speak
To me.
Umh.— 
Why? would you have her gone? you need not keep
Your freedom in for her; she knows my life
That she might write it;
Think she is a stone?
She is a kind of bawdy Confessor,
And will not utter secrets.
Umh.— 
Be gone then, since he needs will have it so,
Tic all one. 
'Is all now as you would? come meet me then,
And bring a thousand kisses on thy lips,
And I will rob thee of 'em, and yet leave
Thy lips as wealthy as they were before.
Yes, all is as I would but thou.
By heaven it is my Father.— 
And I do beseech thee
Leave these unheard of lusts which worse become thee,
Then mocking of thy Father; let thine eyes
Reflect upon thy soul, and there behold
How loathed black it is; and whereas now
Thy face is heavenly fair, but thy mind foul,
Go but into thy Closet, and there cry
Till thou hast spoiled that face, and thou shalt find
How excellent a change, thou wilt have made
For inward beauty.
Though I know him now
To be my Father, never let me live
If my lust do abate.
I'll take upon me
To have known him all this while.
Look, dost thou know me?
I knew ye Sir before.
What did thou do?
Knew you, and so unmov'dly have you borne
All the sad crosses that I laid upon you,
With such a noble temper, which indeed
I purposely cast on you, to discern
Your carriage in calamity, and you
Have undergone 'em with that brave contempt,
That I have turned the reverence of a child
Into the hot affection of a Lover.
Nor can there on the earth be found but yours
A spirit fit to meet with mine.
A woman? thou art not sure.
Look and believe.
Thou art
Something created to succeed the Devil
When be grows weary of his envious course,
And compassing the world; but I believe thee
Thou did but mean to try my patience,
And dost so still; but better be advised:
And make thy trial with some other things
That safelier will admit a dalliance:
And if it should be earnest, understand
How cursed thou art, so far from heaven, that thou
Believe it not enough to damn alone,
Or with a stranger, but would heap all sins
Unnatural upon this aged head
And draw thy Father to thy Bed, and hell.
You are deceived Sir, it is not against nature
For us to lye together; if you have
An arrow of the same tree with your bow,
Is it more unnatural to shoot it there
Then in another? It is our general nature
To procreate, as fires is to consume,
And it will trouble you to find a stick
The fire will turn from: If it be natures will
We should not mix, she will discover to us
Some most apparent crossenesse, as our organs
Will not be fit; which if we do perceive
We'll leave, and think it is her pleasure
That we should deal with others.
The doors are fast; thou shalt not say a prayer,
It is not Gods will thou should; when this is done
I'll kill my self, that never man may tell me
I got thee.
I pray you Sir, help there, for Gods sake Sir.
Hold reverend Sir, for honour of your age.
Whoe's that?
For safety of your soul, and of the soul
Of that too wicked woman yet to dye.
What art thou? and how came thou to that place?
I am a man so strangely hither come,
That I have broke an oath in speaking this,
But I believe it was better broke then kept,
And I desire your patience; let me in,
And I protest I will not hinder you
In any act you wish, more then by word,
If so I can persuade you, that I will not
Use violence, I'll throw my sword down to you:
This house holds none but I, only a maid
Whom I will locke fast in as I come down.
I do not know thee, but thy tongue doth seeeme
To be acquainted with the truth so well
That I will let thee in: throw down thy sword.
There it is.
How came he there? I am betrayed to shame,
The fear of sudden death struck me all over
So violently, that I scarce have breath
To speak yet: But I have it in my head,
And out it shall, that (Father) may perhaps
O're-reach you yet.
Come Sir, what is it you say?
My Angilo, by all the joys of love
Thou art as welcome as these pliant arms
Twined round, and fast about thee, can persuade thee.
Away.
I was in such a fright before thou came,
You old mad fellow, (it will make thee laugh
Though it feared me) has talked so wildly here—
Sirrha, he rushed in at my doors, and swore
He was my Father, and I think believed it:
But that he had a sword, and threatened me—
I'faith he was good sport, good, thrust him out
That thou and I may kiss together; wilt thou?
Are you her Champion? &amp; with these fair words,
Got in to rescue her from me. 
Hold sir,
I swear I doe not harbour such a thought,
I speak it not, for that you have two swords,
But for tic truth.
Two swords my Angilo?
Think this, that thou hast two young brawny arms
And ne'er a sword, and he has two good swords
And ne'er an arm to use 'em; rush upon him,
I could have beaten him with this weak body,
If I had had the spirit of a man.
Stand from me, and leave talking, or by heaven
I'll trample thy last damning word out of thee.
Why do you hinder me then? stand away
And I will rid her quickly.
Would I were
Clear of this business, yet I cannot pray.
Oh be advised, why you were better kill her
If she were good; Convey her from this place
Where none but you, and such as you appoint
May visit her; where let her hear of nought
But death and damning, which she hath deserved,
Till she be truly, justly sorrowful,
And then lay mercy to her, who does know
But she may mend?
But whither should I bear her?
To my house,
It is large, and private, I will lend it you.
I thank you Sir, and happily it fits
With some design I have, but how shall we
Convey her?
Will they cary me away?
For she will scratch and kick, &amp; scream so loud
That people will be drawn to rescue her.
Why? none can hear her here, but her own maid,
Who is as fast as she.
But in the street?
Why, we will take 'em both into the Kitchen,
There bind 'em, and then gag 'em, and then throw 'em
Into a Coach I'll bring to the backe-dore,
And hurry 'em away.
It shall be so,
I owe you much for this; and I may pay you,
There is your sword, lay hold upon her quickly,
This way with me, thou disobedient child.
Why do's thy stubborn heart beat at thy breast?
Let it be still, for I will have it searched
Till I have found a well of living tears
Within it, that shall spring out of thine eyes,
And flow all o'er thy body fouled with sin,
Till it have washed it quite without a stain. 
Help! help! ah! ah!
Murder, I shall be murdered, I shall be murdered.
This helps thee not.
Basely murdered, basely.
I warrant you. 
THis roguy Captain has made fine work with us.
I would the Devil in a storm would carry him
Home to his Garrison again; I ache all over,
That I am sure of; Certainly my body
Is of a wild-fire, for my head rings backward,
Or else I have a morise in my brains.
I'll deal no more with soldiers: well remembered,
Did not the Vision promise to appear
About this time again?
Yes, here he comes:
He's just on's word.
O, they be here together,
Shoe's penitent, and by my troth I stagger
Whether (as now she is) either of these
Two fools be worthy of her; yet because
Her youth is prone to fall again, ungoverned,
And marriage now may stay her, one of 'em:
And Peso, since I understand him abler,
Shall be the man; the other bear the charges,
And willingly, as I will handle it.
I have a Ring here, which he shall believe
Is sent him from a woman I have thought of:
But ever I leave it, I'll have one of his
In pawn worth two on it: for I will not loose
By such a mess of sugar-sops as this is:
I am too old.
It moves again, let's meet it.
Now if I be not out, we shall have fine sport,
I am glad I have met you Sir, so happily,
You do remember me, I am sure.
I doe Sir.
This is a short praeludium to a challenge.
I have a message Sir, that much concerns you,
And for your special good; Nay you may hear too.
What should this fellow mean?
There is a Lady,
(How the poor thing begins to warm already)
Come to this Town, (as yet a stranger here Sir)
Fair, young, and rich, both in possessions,
And all the graces that make up a woman,
A widow, and a virtuous one: It works,
He needs no broth upon it,
What of her Sir?
No more but this; she loves you.
Loves me?
Yes.
And with a strong affection, but a fair one,
If ye be wise and thankful, you are made: ther's the whole matter.
I am sure I hear this.
Here is a Ring Sir, of no little value:
Which after she had seen you at a window,
She bad me hast, and give it, when she blushed
Like a blown rose.
But pray Sir by your leave—
Me thinks your years should promise no ill meaning.
I am no Bawd, nor cheater, nor a coarser
Of broken-winded women: if you fear me
I'll take my leave: and let my Lady use
A fellow of more form; an honester
I am sure she cannot.
Stay, you have confirmed me,
Yet let me feel, you are in health.
I hope so,
My water's well enough, and my pulse.
Then
All may be excellent: pray pardon me;
For I am like a boy that had found money,
Afraid I dream still.
Sir, what kind of woman?
Of what proportion is your Lady?
I,
I'll tell you presently her very picture,
Do you know a woman in this town they call,
Stay, yes, it is so, Lily?
Not by sight.
Nor you Sir?
Neither.
These are precious Rogues
To rail upon a woman they never saw;
So they would use their Kindred.
We have heard though
She is very fair and goodly.
Such another,
Just of the same complexion, making, speech,
But a thought sweeter is my Lady.
Then
She must be excellent indeed.
Indeed she is,
And you will find it so; you do believe me?
Yes marry do I, and I am so altered —
Your happiness will alter any man.
Do not delay the time Sir: at a house
Where Don Valasco lay, the Spanish Signior
(Which now is Seignior Angelos) she is.
I know it.
But before you show your self,
Let it be night by all means, willingly
By day she would not have such gallants seen
Repair unto her it is her modesty.
I'll go and fit my self.
Doe, and be sure
You send provision in, in full abundance,
Fit for the marriage; for this night I know
She will be yours: Sir, have you never a token
Of worth to send her back again? you must,
She will expect it.
Yes, pray give her this,
And with it all I have; I am made for ever. 
Well, thou hast fools luck; should I live as long
As an old oak, and say my prayers hourly
I should not be the better of a penny.
I think the Devil be my ghostly Father;
Upon my conscience I am full as handsome,
I am sure I have more wit, and more performance,
Which is a pretty matter.
Do you think sir,
That your friend Signeur Peso will be constant
Unto my Lady? you should know him well.
Who? Seignior Peso?
Yes, the Gentleman.
Why, you are wide Sir.
Is not his name Peso?
No, mine is Peso.
How?
It is indeed Sir,
And his is Lodowicke.
Then I am undone Sir,
For I was sent at first to Peso; what a rascal
Was I, so ignorantly to mistake you?
Peace.
There is no harm done yet.
Now it is too late,
I know my error:
At turning of a Street,
For you were then upon the right hand of him,
You changed your places suddenly: where I
(Like a cross Block-head) lost my memory:
What shall I do? my Lady utterly
Will put me from her favour.
Never fear it,
I'll be thy guard, I warrant thee, O, O,
Am I at length reputed? for the Ring,
I'll fetch it back with a light vengeance from him:
Had better keep tame Devils, then that Ring;
Art thou not Steward?
No.
Thou shalt be shortly
Lord how he takes it?
I'll go shift me straight;
Art sure it was to Peso?
O too sure Sir.
I'll mount thee if I live for it,
Give me patience heaven to be are this blessing I beseech thee;
I am but man; I prithee break my head
To make me understand, I am sensible.
Lend me your dagger, and I will Sir.
No
I believe now like a good Christian.
Good Sir make hast; I dare not go without ye
Since I have so mistaken.
It is no matter,
Meet me within this half hour at St. Margrets.
Well go thy ways old leg, thou hast the trick on it. 
How now? the news?
Well, passing well, I have 'em,
Both in a leash and made right for my purpose.
I am glad on it I must leave you.
Whether man?
If all go right, I may be fast enough too.
I cry you mercy Sir, I know your meaning,
Clora's the woman, she's Francks bedfellow,
Commend me to 'em, and go Julio
Bring 'm to supper all, to grace this matter;
They serve for witnesses.
I will, Farewell. 
Sister, I brought you Jacamo to the door,
He has forgot all that he said last night:
And shame of that makes him more loath to come,
I left Fabritio persuading him, but it is in vain.
Alas my fortune Clora.
Now Frank, See what a kind of man you love,
That loves you when hoe's drunk; If so
Faith I would marry him; My friends I hope
Would make him drink.
It is well considered Frank, he has such pretty humours then,
Besides being a Soldier, it is better he should love
You when hoe's drunk, then when hoe's sober, for then he
Will be sure to love you, the greatest part on's life.
And were not I a happy woman then?
That ever was borne Frank. y'faith—
How now? what says hee?
Faith you may as well tice a dog up with a whip, and bell
As him, by telling him of love and women, he swears
They mock him.
Look how my Sister weeps.
Why who can help it?
Yes, you may safely swear she loves him.
Why so I did; and may do all the oaths,
Arithmetic can make, ere he believe me,
And since he was last drunk, he is more jealous
They would abuse him: If we could persuade him
She loved, he would embrace it.
She her self
Shall bate so much of her own modesty
To swear it to him; with such tears as now
You see rain from her.
I believe it would work,
But would you have her do it in the open street?
Or if you would he will run away from her,
How shall we get him hither?
By entreaty.
It is most impossible, No, If we could
Anger him hither, as there is no way
But that to bring him; and then hold him fast
Women, and men, whilst she delivers to him the truth
Sealed with her tears, he would be plain
As a pleased child; he walks below for me
Under the window.
VVee'le anger him I warrant ye,
Let one of the maids take a good bowl of water,
Or say it be a piss-pott, and power't on's head.
Content hang me If I like not the cast of it rarely, for no question it,
Is an approved receipt to fetch such a fellow
Take all the women-kind in this house, betwixt the age of one,
And one hundred, &amp; let them take unto them a pot or a
Bowl containing seven quarts or upwards, &amp; let them
Never leave, till the above named,
Pot or Bowl become full, then let one of them stretch out
Her arm and power it on his head, add Probatum est, it
Will fetch him, for in his anger he will run up, &amp; then let
Us alone.
Go you and do it. 
Good Clora, no.
Away I say &amp; do it; never fear, we have enough of that
Water ready distilled.
Why this will make him mad Fabritio,
He will neither love me drunk, nor sober now.
I warrant you: what, is the wench come up?
Art thou there wench?
I.
Look out then if thou can see him.
Yes I see him, &amp; by my troth he stands so fair I could not
Hold were he my Father; his hat's of too, &amp; he's scratching
His head.
O wash that hand I prithee. (I have thrown thee
God send thee good luck, this the second time,
Out to day, ha, ha, ha, just on's head.
Alas!
What does he now?
He gathers stones, God's light, he breaks all the Street windows
Whore's Bawds, your windows, your windows.
Now he is breaking all the low windows with his Sword,
Excellent sport, Now he's beating a fellow that laughed at him;
Truly the man takes it patiently; Now he goes down the Street
Gravely, looking on each side, ther's not one more dare laugh.
Does he go on?
Yes.
Fabritio, you have undone a Maid
By treachery; know you some other better,
You would prefer your friend to? If you do not
Bring him again, I have no other hope,
But you that made me loose hope, If you fail me,
I ne'er shall see him, but shall languish out
A discontented life, and dye contemned.
This vexes me, I pray you be more patient
If I have any truth, let what will happen,
I'll bring him presently, Do you all stand
At the Street door, the Maids, and all, to watth
When I come back, and have some private place
To shuffle me into, for he shall follow
In fury, but I know I can out run him:
As he comes in, clap all fast hold on him,
And use your own discretions.
Wee will do it.
But suddenly for I will bring him hither,
With that unstopped speed that you shall run over
All that's in's way: and though my life be ventured
It is no great matter, will do it.
I thank you,
Worthy Fabritio.
I ever knew no woman could abide me,
But am I grown so contemptible, by being once drunk
Amongst 'em, that they begin to throw peace on my head?
For surely it was peace huh, huh. 
Jacamo, how dost thou?
Well, something troubled with waterish humours.
Foh, how thou stinck'st; prithee stand further of me
Me things these humours become thee better then thy dry
Choleric humours, or thy wine-wet humours; ha?
You're pleasant, but Fabrito know I am not in the wood of
Suffering jest.
If you be not in the mood I hope you will not be moody
But truly I cannot blame the Gentlewoman, you stood eavesdropping,
Under their window, and would not come up.
Sir, I suspect now, by your idle talk
Your hand was in it, which if I once believe,
Be sure you shall account to me.
The Gentlewomen and the Maids have counted to you already
The next turn I see is mine.
Let me dye but this is very strange; good Fabritio
Do not provoake me so.
Provoke you? you're grown the strongest fellow; ther's no
Keeping company with you, phish; take you that.
O all the Devils? stand Slave. 
follow me if thou dare.
Stay coward, stay.— 
Be ready for I see Fabritio running,
And Jacamo behind him.
Wher's the place.
That way Fabritio.
Where art thou treacher? 
What is the matter Sirs?
Why do you hold me? I am basely wronged,
Torture, and hell, be with you; let me go. 
Good Iacamo be patient, and but hear
What I can say, you know I am your friend,
If you yet doubt it, by my soul I am.
S'death stand away;
I would my breath were poison.
As I have life that which was thrown on you,
And this now done, were but to draw you hither
For causes weighty, that concern your self
Uoid of all malice, which this Maid my Sister
Shall tell you.
Puh, a pox upon you all; you will not hold me
For ever here, and till you let me go,
I'll talk no more.
As you're a Gentleman
Let not this boldness make me be believed,
To be immodest; If there were a way
More silently to be acquainted with you
God knows, that I would choose, But as it is
Take it in plainness: I do love you more
Then you do your content, If you refuse
To pity me, I'll never cease to weep,
And when mine eyes be out I will be told
How fast the tears I shed for you do fall,
And if they do not flow abundantly,
I'll fetch a sigh shall make 'em start, and leap,
As if the fire wear under.
Fine mocking, fine mocking.
Mocking? look how she weeps.
Do's she counterfeit crying too.
Behold how the tears flow, or pity her
Or never more be called a man.
How's this? soft you, soft you my Masters: Is it possible think you,
She should be in earnest?
Earnest? I in earnest: she's a fool to break so many sleeps,
That would have been sound ones, &amp; venture such a face, &amp;
So much life, for ere an humorous ass in the world.
Why Clora? I have known you cry as much?
For Julio, that has not half his worth,
All night you write and weep too much I fear
I do but what I should.
If I do write
I am answered Frank.
I would I might be so.
Good Fredrick let me go I would fine try
If that thing do not counterfeit.
Give me your Sword then.
No, but take my word,
As I am man, I will not hurt a creature
Under this roof, before I have delivered
My self, as I am now into your hands,
Or have your full consent.
It is enough.
Gentlwoman, I pray you let me feel your face; I am an
Infidel, if she do not weep: Stay, wher's my handkerchife?
I'll wipe the old wet off, the fresh tears come, pox on it
I am a handsome, gracious fellow amongst women, and
Know it not Gentlewoman; how should I know these
For me? Is not your Mother dead?
By heaven they are for you.
Slight I'll have my head corld, and powderd to tears are morrow
By break of day; If you love me, I pray you kiss me,
For If I love you, it shall be such love, as I will not be
A shamed of, If this be a mock— 
It is the hartiest, and the sweetest mock
That ere I tasted, mock me so again
Fie Iacamo? why do you let her kneel
So long?
It's true I had forgot it
And should have done this twelve-moneth; pray you rise
Fredrick, If I could all this while have been persuaded she could
Have loved me, dost thou think I had not rather kiss her
Then another should? and yet you may gull me for ought
I know, but if you do, hell take me If I do not cut
All your throats sleeping.
Oh do not think of such a thing.
Otherwise, If she be in earnest, the short is I am.
Alas, I am.
And I did not think it possible any woman
Could have liked this face, it's good for nothing, is it?
Yes it's worth forty shillings to pawn, being lind almost quite
Through with velvet.
It is better then your Iulio's.
Thou think so,
But otherwise, in faith it is not Frank
Hist Iacamo; How dost thou Boy? ha?
Why very well, I thank you Sir.
Dost thou perceive the reason of matters, and passages,
Yet Sirah, or no?
It is wondrous good Sir.
I have done simply for you, but now you are beaten to some
Understanding, I pray you dally not with the Gentlewoman
But dispatch your Matrimony, with all convenient speed.
He gives good counsel.
And I will follow it.
And I you, prithee do not take it unkindly,
For trust me I boxed thee for thy advancement,
A foolish desire I had to joggle thee into preferment.
I apprehend you Sir, &amp; if I can study out a course
How a bastinadoing may any ways raise your fortunes
In the State, you shall be sure on it.
Oh Sir keep your way, God send you much joy.
And me my Iulio.
O God I hear his voice, now he is true,
Have at a marriage Frank, as soon as you
Sir I would speak with you.
What is your hasty business friend?
The Duke commands your present attendance at Court.
The cause?
I know not in particular; but this
Many are sent for more, about affairs
Foreign I take it Sir.
I will be there
Within this hour, return my humble service.
I will Sir. 
Farewell friend, what new's with you?
My Mistress would desire you Sir to follow
With all the hast you can, she is gon to Church,
To marry Captain Iacamo, and Iulio,
To do as much for the young merry Gentlewoman,
Fair Mistress Clora.
Julio, marry Clora?
Thou art deceived I warrant thee.
No sure Sir,
I saw their lips as close upon the bargain
As Cockles.
Give 'em joy, I cannot now go,
The Duke hath sent for me in hast.
This note Sir: when you are free, will bring you where they are. 
 You shall find us all at Signeur Angilo's,
Where Peso, and the worthy Lily
Of famous memory are to be married,
And we not far behind.
Would I had time
To wonder at this last couple in hell.
You are staid for Sir.
I come, pray God the business
Hold me not from this sport, I would not loose it. 
God give you joy, and make you live together
A happy pair.
I do not doubt we shall.
There was never poor Gentleman had such a sudden fortune,
I could thrust my head betwixt 2. pales, &amp; strip me out of
My old skin like a Snake: will the guests come thou said
Thou sent for to solemnise the Nuptials?
They will, I look for em ere this.
By your leave all.
They are here Sir.
Especially fair Lady
I ask your pardon, to whose marriage bed
I wish all good success, I have here brought you
Such guests as can discern your happiness,
And best do know how to rejoice at it;
For such a fortune they themselves have run,
The worthy Iacamo, and his fair Bride,
Noble Fabritio, whom this age of peace
Has not yet aught to love ought but the wars,
And his true friends, this Lady who is but
A piece of me.
Sir, you are welcome all,
Are they not Sir?
Bring in some wine, some of the wine Lodwick the fool. 
Sent hither: who ever thou bid welcome shall find it
An unexpected honour you have done
To our too hasty wedding.
Faith Madam, our weddings were as hasty as yours
We'ar glad to run up &amp; down any whether, to see where
We can get meat to our wedding.
That Lodwick hath provided too, good Ass.
I thought you Iulio, would not thus have stolen a marriage
Without acquainting your friends.
Why I did give thee incklings.
If a marriage should be thus slubberd up in a play, ever almost
Any body had taken notice you were in love, the Spectators
Would take it to be but ridiculous.
This was the first, and I will never hide
An other secret from you.
Sir, yonder's your friend Lodwick, hide your self
And twill be the best sport—
Gentlemen, I pray you take no notice, I'm here.
The coxcomb Lodwick is coming in.
Is that that Lady?
That is my Lady.
As I live she's a fair one; what make al these here?
O Lord Sir she is so pesterd—
Now will the sport be, it runs right as Iulio told us
Fair Lady health to you; some words I have, that
Require an utterance more private,
Then this place can afford.
I'll call my husband
All business I hear with his ears now.
Good Madam no, bet I perceive your jest,
You have no husband, I am the very man
That walked the streets so comely.
Are you so?
Yes faith, when Cupped first did prick your heart
I am not cruel, but the love began
In the Street I'll satisfy in the chamber fully.
To ask a Madman whether he be mad
Were but an idle question, if you be,
I do not speak to you, but if you be not
Walk in the Streets again and there perhaps
I may dote on you, here I not endure you.
Good Madam stay do not you know this Ring?
Yes it was mine, I sent it by my Man,
To change and so he did, it has a blemish,
And this he brought me for it; did you change it?
Are you a Goldsmith?
Sure the world is mad,
Sirrah, did you not bring me this ring from your Lady?
Yes surely Sir, did I, but your worship must even bear with me;
For there was a mistaking in it, and so: as I was
Saying to your worship, my Lady is now married.
Married? to whom?
To your worships friend Peso.
S'death to Peso?
within. Ha, ha, ha.
Yes Sir I can assure you she's married to him, I saw't
With these gray eyes.
Why what a Rogue art thou then? thou hast made
Me send in provision too.
O a Gentleman should not have such foul words in's mouth
But your Worships provision could not have come in at a fitter time;
Will it please you to taste any of your own wine?
It may be the Vintner has consent you.
Pox I am mad.
You have always plots Sir, &amp; see how they fall out.
You had a plot upon me, how do you like this?
I do not speak to you.
Because you dare not.
But I will have one of that old Rogues teeth set in this Ring
Dost not thou know that I can beat thee?
Dost thou know it now? (discovers himself)
He beat me once indeed.
And if you have forgot it, I can call a witness.
Come forth Peso—remember you it?
Faith I do call to mind such a matter.
And if I cannot still do it, you are young
And will assist your Father in law.
My Father in law?
Your Father in law, as sure as this is widow Lily.
How widow Lily?
I faith it is she, Son.
Ha, ha, ha, let my provision go, I am glad I
Have mist the woman.
Have you put a whore upon me?
By heaven you do me wrong, I have a heart
As pure as any women's, and I mean
To keep it so for ever.
There is no starting now, Son, if you offer't
I can compel you, her estate is great,
But all made o'er to me, before this match,
Yet if you use her kindly, as I swear
I think she will deserve, you shall enjoy it
During your life, all save some slender piece
I will reserve for my own maintenance,
And if God bless you with a child by her,
It shall have all.
So I may have the means
I doe not much care what the woman is:
Come my sweet heart, as long as I shall find
Thy kisses sweet, and thy means plentiful,
Let people talk their tongues out.
They may talk
Of what is past, but all that is to come
Shall be without occasions.
Shall we not make Peso, and Lodwick friends?
Hang'em they dare not be Enemies, or if they be,
The danger is not great, welcome Fredrick.
First joy unto you all; and next I think
We shall have wars.
Give me some wine, I'll drink to that.
I'll pledge.
But I shall loose you then.
Not a vvhit wench; I'll teach thee presently to be a Soldier
Fabritios command, and yours are both restored
Bring me four glasses then.
Where are they?
You shall not drink 'em here, it is supper time,
And from my house no creature here shall stir,
These three days, mirth shall flow as well as wine.
Content, within I'll tell you more at large
How much I am bound to all, but most to you,
Whose undeserved liberality
Must not escape thus unrequited,
It is happinsse to me, I did so well:
Of every noble action, the intent
Is to give worth reward, vice, punishment. 
TO please you with this Play, we fear will be
(So does the Author too) a mystery
Somewhat above our Art; For all men's eyes,
Ears, faiths, and judgements, are not of one size.
For to say truth, and not to flatter ye,
This is nor Comody, nor Tragedy,
Nor History, nor any thing that may
(Yet in a week) be made a perfect Play:
Yet those that love to laugh, and those that think
Twelve-pence goes farther this way then in drink,
Or Damsels, if they mark the matter through,
May stumble on a foolish toy, or two
Will make 'em show their teeth: pray, for my sake
(That likely am your first man) doe not take
A distaste before you feel it: for ye may
When this is hist to ashes, have a Play.
And here, to out-hisse this; be patient then,
(My honour done) you're welcome Gentlemen.
IF you mislike; (as you shall ever be
Your own free Judges) this Play utterly,
For your own Nobleness, yet do not hiss,
But as you go by, say it was amiss;
And we will mend: Chide vs, but let it be
Never in cold blood: Of my honesty
(If I have any) this I'll say for all,
Our meaning was to please you still, and shall.

