THe hardy Romans? O ye gods of Britain,
the rust of Arms, the blushing shame of soldiers;
are these the men that conquer by inheritance?
the Fortune-makers? these the Julians,
that with the Sun measure the end of Nature,
making the world but one Rome and one Caesar?
Shame, how they flee! Caesars soft soul dwells in 'em;
their mothers got 'em sleeping, pleasure nursed 'em,
their bodies sweat with sweet oils, loves allurements,
not lusty Arms. Dare they send these to seek us,
these Roman Girls? Is Britain grown so wanton?
Twice we have beat 'em, Nennius, scattered 'em,
and through their big-bon'd Germans, on whose Pikes
the honour of their actions sit in triumph,
made Themes for songs to shame 'em, and a woman,
a woman beat'em, Nennius; a weak woman,
a woman beat these Romans.
So it seems.
A man would shame to talk so.
Who's that?
I.
Cousin, do you grieve my fortunes?
No, Bonduca,
if I grieve, 't is the bearing of your fortunes;
you put too much wind to your sail: Discretion
and hardy Valour are the twins of Honour,
and nursed together, make a Conqueror:
divided, but a talker. 'T is a truth,
that Rome has fled before us twice, and routed;
a truth we ought to crown the gods for, Lady,
and not our tongues. A truth is none of ours,
nor in our ends, more then the noble bearing:
for then it leaves to be a virtue, Lady;
and we that have been Victors, beat our selves,
when we insult upon our honours subject.
My valiant Cousin, is it foul to say
what liberty and honour bid us do,
and what the gods allow us?
No, Bonduca,
so what we say, exceed not what we do.
Ye call the Romans fearful, fleeing Romans,
and Roman Girls, the lees of tainted pleasures:
does this become a doer? are they such?
They are no more.
Where is your Conquest then?
why are your Altars crowned with wreathes of flowers,
the beasts with gilt horns waiting for the fire?
the holy Druids composing songs
of everlasting life to Victory?
Why are these triumphs, Lady? for a May-game?
for hunting a poor herd of wretched Romans?
is it no more? shut up your Temples, Britains,
and let the Husband-man redeem his heifers;
put out our holy fires; no Timbrel ring;
let's home, and sleep; for such great overthrows,
a Candle burns too bright a sacrifice,
a Glow-worms tail too full a flame. O Nennius,
thou had a noble Uncle knew a Roman,
and how to speak him, how to give him weight
in both his fortunes.
By—I think
ye dote upon these Romans, Caratach.
Witness these wounds, I do; they were fairly given.
I love an enemy: I was born a soldier;
and he that in the head on 's Troop defies me,
bending my manly body with his sword,
I make a Mistress. Yellow-tressed Hymen
ne'er tied a longing Virgin with more joy,
then I am married to that man that wounds me:
and are not all these Roman? Ten struck Battles
I sucked these honoured scars from, and all Roman:
ten years of bitter nights and heavy marches,
when many a frozen storm sung thorough my Curasse,
and made it doubtful whether that or I
were the more stubborn metal, have I wrought thorough,
and all to try these Romans. Ten times a night
I have swam the Rivers, when the stars of Rome
shot at me as I sloated, and the billows
tumbled their watery ruins on my shoulders,
charging my battered sides with troops of Agues;
and still to try these Romans, whom I found
(and if I lye, my wounds be henceforth backward,
and be you witness, gods, and all my dangers)
as ready, and as full of that I brought
(which was not fear nor flight) as valiant,
as vigilant, as wise, to do and suffer,
ever advanced as forward as the Britains,
their sleeps as short, their hopes as high as ours,
I, and as subtle, Lady. 'T is dishonour,
and, followed, will be impudence, Bonduca,
and grow to no belief, to taint these Romance.
Have not I seen the Britains—
What?
Dishearted,
run, run, Bonduca, not the quick rack swifter;
the virgin from the hated ravisher
not half so fearful? not a flight drawn home,
a round stone from a Sling, a lovers wish
ere made that haste that they have. By—
I have seen these Britains, that you magnify,
run •s they would have out-run time, and roaring
basely for mercy, roaring: the light shadows
that in a thought scur ore the fields of Corn,
halted on crutches to 'em.
O ye Powers,
what scandals do I suffer?
Yes, Bonduca,
I have seen thee run too, and thee, Nennius;
yea, run apace, both; then when Penyus
the Roman Girl cut thorough your armed Carts,
and drive 'em headlong on ye down the hill;
then when he hunted ye, like Britain-Foxes,
more by the sent then sight: then did I see
these valiant and approved men of Britain,
like boding Owls, creep into tods of Ivy,
and hoot their fears to one another nightly.
And what did you then, Caratach?
I fled too,
but not so fast; your Jewel had been lost then,
young Hengo there; he trasht me, Nennius:
for when your fears out-run him, then stepped I,
and in the head of all the Roman fury
took him, and with my tough Belt to my back
I buckled him; behind him, my sure Shield;
and then I followed. If I say I fought
five times in bringing off this bud of Britain,
I lye not, Nennius. Neither had ye heard
me speak this, or ever seen the child more,
but that the son of virtue, Penyus,
seeing me steer thorough all these storms of danger,
my helm still in my hand, my sword my prow,
turned to my so my face, he cried out nobly,
Go, Britain, bear thy Lions whelp off safely;
thy manly sword has ransomed thee: grow strong,
and let me meet thee once again in arms;
then if thou stand, thou art mine. I took his offer,
and here I am to honour him.
O Cousin,
from what a flight of honour hast thou checked me?
what would thou make me, Caratach?
See, Lady,
the noble use of others in our losses;
does this afflict ye? Had the Romans cried this,
and as we have done theirs, sung out these fortunes,
railed on our base condition, hooted at us,
made marks as far as the earth was ours, to show us
nothing but sea could stop our flights; despised us,
and held it equal whether banqueting
or beating of the Britains were more business,
it would have galled ye.
Let me think we conquered.
Do; but so think, as we may be conquered:
and where we have found virtue, though in those
that came to make us slaves, let's cherish it.
There's not a blow we gave since Julius landed,
that was of strength and worth, but like Records
they file to after-ages. Our Registers,
the Romans, are for noble deeds of honour;
and shall we burn their mentions with upbraidings?
No more, I see my self: thou hast made me, Cousin,
more then my fortunes durst; for they abused me,
and wound me up so high, I swelled with glory:
thy temperance has cured that Timpani,
and given me health again, nay, more discretion.
Shall we have peace? for now I love these Romans.
Thy love and hate are both unwise ones, Lady.
Your reason?
Is not Peace the end of Arms?
Not where the cause implies a general Conquest:
had we a difference with some petty Isle,
or with our neighbours (Lady) for our Land-marks,
the taking in of some rebellious Lord,
or making a head against Commotions,
after a day of Blood, Peace might be argued:
But where we grapple for the ground we live on,
the Liberty we hold as dear as life,
the gods we worship, and next those, our Honours,
and with those swords that know no end of Battle:
those men beside themselves allow no neighbour;
those minds that where the day is claim inheritance,
and where the sun makes ripe the fruits, their harvest,
and where they march, but measure out more ground
to add to Rome, and here in the bowels on us;
it must not be; no, as they are our foes,
and those that must be so until we tire 'em,
let 's use the peace of Honour, that 's fair dealing,
but in our ends, our swords. That hardy Roman
that hopes to graft himself into my stock,
must first begin his kindred under ground,
and be allied in ashes.
Caratach,
as thou hast nobly spoken, shall be done;
and Hengo to thy charge I here deliver:
the Romans shall have worthy Wars.
They shall.
And, little Sir, when your young bones grow stiffer,
and when I see ye able in a morning
to beat a dozen boys, and then to breakfast,
I'll tie ye to a sword.
And what then, Uncle?
Then ye must kill, Sir, the next valiant Roman
that calls ye knave.
And must I kill but one?
An hundred, boy, I hope.
I hope five hundred.
That 's a noble boy. Come, worthy Lady,
let's to our several charges, and henceforth
allow an enemy both weight and worth. 
What ailst thou, man? dost thou want meat?
No.
Clothes?
Neither. For heavens love, leave me.
Drink?
Ye tire me.
Come, 't is drink; I know 't is drink.
'T is no drink.
I say 't is drink: for what affliction
can light so heavy on a Soldier,
to dry him up as thou art, but no drink?
Thou shalt have drink.
Prithee, Petillius—
And by mine honour, much drink, valiant drink:
never tell me, thou shalt have drink. I see,
like a true friend, into thy wants: it is drink;
and when I leave thee to a desolation,
especially of that dry nature, hang me.
Why do you do this to me?
For I see▪
although your modesty would fain conceal it,
which sits as sweetly on a Soldier,
as an old side-saddle.
What do you see?
I see as far as day, that thou want drink.
Did I not find thee gaping like an Oyster
for a new tide? thy very thoughts lie bare
like a lowe ebb? thy soul that rid in Sack,
lies moored for want of liquor? Do but see
into thy self; for by—I do:
for all thy body 's chapt, and cracked like timber
for want of moisture: what thou want there, Junius,
and if it be not drink.
You have too much on 't.
It may be a whore too; say it be: come, moocher,
thou shalt have both: a pretty valiant fellow,
die for a little lap and lechery?
no, it shall ne'er be said in our Country,
thou dy'dst of the Chin-cough. Hear, thou noble Roman,
the son of her that loves a Soldier,
hear what I promised for thee; thus I said,
Lady, I take thy son to my companion,
Lady, I love thy son, thy son loves war,
the war loves danger, danger drink, drink discipline,
which is society and lechery;
these two beget Commanders: fear not, Lady,
thy son shall lead.
'T is a strange thing, Petillius,
that so ridiculous and loose a mirth
can master your affections.
Any mirth,
and any way, of any subject, Junius,
is better then unmanly mustiness:
what harm's in drink, in a good wholesome wench?
I do beseech ye, Sir, what error? yet
it cannot out of my head handsomely,
but thou would fain be drunk: come, no more fooling,
the General has new wine, new come over.
He must have new acquaintance for it too,
for I will none, I thank ye.
None, I thank ye?
a short and touchy answer. None I thank ye:
ye do not scorn it, do ye?
Gods defend Sir;
I owe him still more honour.
None, I thank ye:
no company, no drink, no wench, I thank ye.
Ye shall be worse entreated, Sir.
Petillius,
as thou art honest, leave me.
None, I thank ye;
a modest and a decent resolution,
and well put on. Yes, I will leave ye, Junius,
and leave ye to the boys, that very shortly
shall all salute ye, by your new surname
of Junius none I thank ye. I would starve now,
hang, drown, despair, deserve the forks, lie open
to all the dangerous passes of a wench,
bound to believe her tears, and wed her aches,
ere I would own thy follies. I have found ye,
your lays, and out-leaps Junius, haunts, and lodges:
I have viewed ye, and I have found ye by my skill
to be a fool of the first head, Junius,
and I will hunt ye: ye are in love, I know it:
ye are an asle, and all the Camp shall know
a peevish idle boy; your dame shall know it;
a wronger of my care; your self shall know it.
A Bean? a princely diet, a full banquet,
to what we compass.
Fight like hogs for Acorns?
Venture our lives for pig-nuts?
What ail these Rascals?
If this hold, we are starved.
For my part, friends,
which is but twenty Beans a day, a hard world
for Officers, and men of action;
and those so clipped by master mouse, and rotten:
for understand 'em French Beans, where the fruits
are ripened like the people, in old tubs.
For mine own part, I say, I am starved already,
not worth another Bean, consumed to nothing,
nothing but flesh and bones left, miserable:
now if this musty provender can prick me
to honourable matters of achievement, Gentlemen,
why there's the point.
I'll fight no more.
You'll hang then,
a sovereign help for hunger. Ye eating Rascals,
whose gods are Beef and Brewis, whose brave angers
do execution upon these, and Chibbals:
ye dogs heads in the porridge pot; you fight no more?
does Rome depend upon your resolution
for eating mouldy pie-crust?
Would we had it.
I may do service, Captain.
In a Fish-market.
You, Corporal Curry-comb, what will your fighting
profit the Common-wealth? do you hope to triumph,
or dare your vamping valour, good man Cobbler,
clap a new sole to the Kingdom? s' death, ye dog-whelps
you, fight, or not fight.
Captain.
Out, ye flesh-flyes,
nothing but noise and nastiness.
Give us meat,
whereby we may do.
Whereby hangs your valour?
Good bits afford good blows.
A good position:
how long is 't since thou eat'st last? wipe thy mouth,
and then tell truth.
I have not eat to the purpose—
To the purpose? what's that? half a Cow, and Garlic?
ye Rogues, my Company eat Turf, and talk not;
timber they can digest, and fight upon 't;
old matts, and mud with spoons, rare meats. Your shoes, slaves,
dare ye cry out of hunger, and those extant?
suck your Sword-hilts, ye slaves, if ye be valiant;
honour will make 'em march-pain: to the purpose?
a grievous penance. Dost thou see that Gentleman,
that melancholy Monsieur?
Pray ye, Petillius.
He has not eat these three weeks.
'has drunk the more then.
And that 's all one.
Nor drunk nor slept these two months.
Captain, We do beseech you as poor Soldiers, men that have seen good days, whose mortal stomachs may sometime feel afflictions.
This, Petillius,
is not so nobly done.
'T is common profit;
urge him to the point, he 'll find you out a food
that needs no teeth nor stomach; a strange formity
will feed ye up as fat as hens in the foreheads,
and make ye fight like Fichocks, to him.
Cap•own.
Do you long to have your throats cut?
See what metal
it makes in him: two meals more of this melancholy,
and there lies Caratach.
We do beseech ye.
Humbly beseech your valour.
Am I only
become your sport, Petillius?
But to render
in way of general good, in preservation.
Out of my thoughts, ye slaves.
Or rather pity.
Your warlike remedy against the maw-worms.
Or notable receipt to live by nothing.
Out with your Table-books.
Is this true friendship?
and must my killing griefs make others May-games?
Stand from my swords point, slaves; your poor starved spirits
can make me no oblations; else, O love,
thou proudly blind destruction, I would send thee
whole Hecatombs of hearts, to bleed my sorrows.
Alas, he lives by love, Sir, 
So he does, Sir,
and cannot you do so too? All my Company
are now in love, ne'er think of meat, nor talk
of what Provant is: aims, and hearty hey-hoes,
are Sallets fit for Soldiers. Live by meat,
by larding up your bodies? 't is lewd, and lazy,
and shows ye merely mortal, dull, and drives ye
to fight like Camels, with baskets at your noses.
Get ye in love; ye can whore well enough,
that all the world knows: fast ye into Famine,
yet ye can crawl like Crabs to wenches, handsomely.
Fall but in love now, as ye see example,
and follow it but with all your thoughts, probatum,
there's so much charge saved, and your hungers ended.
Away, I hear the General: get ye in love all, 
up to the ears in love, that I may hear
no more of these rude murmurings; and discreetly
carry your stomachs, or I prophecy
a pickel'd rope will choke ye. Jog, and talk not. 
Demetrius, is the messenger dispatched
to Penyus, to command him to bring up
the Volans Regiment?
He 's there by this time.
And are the horse well viewed we brought from Mona?
The Troops are full, and lusty.
Good Petillius,
look to those eating Rogues, that bawl for victuals,
and stop their throats a day or two: provision
waits but the wind to reach us.
Sir, already
I have been tampering with their stomachs, which I find
as deaf as Adders to delays: your clemency
hath made their murmurs, mutinies, nay, rebellions:
now, and they want but Mustard, they 're in uproars:
no oil but Candy, Lucitanian figs,
and wine from Lestos, now can satisfy 'em:
the British waters are grown dull and muddy,
the fruit disgustful: Orontes must be sought for,
and Apples from the happy Isles: the truth is,
they are more curious now in having nothing,
then if the sea and land turned up their treasures:
this lost the Colonies, and gave Bonduca
(with shame we must reason•d it) time and strength
to look into our Fortunes; great discretion
to follow offered Victory; and last, full pride
to brave us to our teeth, and scorn our ruins.
Nay, chide not, good Petillius, I confess
my will to conquer Mona, and long stay
to execute that will, let in these losses:
all shall be right again, and as a pine
rent from Oeta by a sweeping tempest,
jointed again, and made a Mast, defies
those angry winds that split him: so will I,
pieced to my never-failing strength and fortune,
steer thorough these swelling dangers, plow their prides up,
and bear like thunder through their loudest tempests:
they keep the field still.
Confident and full.
In such a number, one would swear they grew,
the hills are wooded with their partisans,
and all the valleys over-grown with darts,
as moors are with rank rushes: no ground left us
to charge upon, no room to strike: say fortune
and our endeavours bring us in to 'em,
they are so infinite, so ever springing,
we shall be killed with killing; of desperate women,
that neither fear, or shame ere found, the devil
has ranked amongst 'em multitudes: say the men fail,
they 'll poison us with their petticoats: say they fail,
they have priests enough to pray us into nothing.
These are imaginations, dreams of nothings,
the man that doubts or fears.
I am free of both.
The self-same I.
And I as free as any;
as careless of my flesh, of that we call life,
so I may lose it nobly; as indifferent
as if it were my diet. Yet, noble General,
it was a wisdom learned from you; I learned it,
and worthy of a Soldiers care, most worthy,
to weigh with most deliberate circumstance
the ends of accidents, above their offers;
how to go on and get, to save a Roman,
whose on• life is more worth in way of doing,
then millions of these painted wasps; how viewing
to find advantage out; how, found, to follow it
with counsel and discretion, lest mere fortune
should claim the victory.
It is true, Petillius,
and worthily remembered: the rule's certain,
their uses no less excellent: but where time
cuts off occasions, danger, time and all
tend to a present peril, 't is required
our Swords and Manhoods be best counsellors,
our expeditions, presidents. To win, is nothing,
where reason, time and counsel are our Camp-masters:
but there to bear the field, then to be conquerors,
where pale destruction takes us, takes us beaten,
in wants, and mutinies, our selves but handfuls,
and to our selves our own fears, needs a new way,
a sudden and a desperate execution:
here, how to save, is loss; to be wise, dangerous;
only a present well-united strength,
and minds made up for all attempts, dispatch it:
disputing and delay here, cools the courage;
necessity gives time for doubts; things infinite,
according to the spirit they are preached to,
rewards like them; and names for after-ages,
must steel the Soldier; his own shame help to arm him;
and having forced his spirit, ere he cools,
fling him upon his enemies; sudden and swift,
like Tigers amongst Foxes, we must fight for 't:
Fury must be our Fortune; shame we have lost,
spurs ever in our sides to prick us forward:
there is no other wisdom nor discretion
due to this day of ruin, but destruction;
the Soldiers order first, and then his anger.
No doubt they dare redeem all.
Then no doubt
the day must needs be ours. That the proud woman
is infinite in number, better likes me,
then if we dealt with squadrons: half her Army
shall choke themselves, their own swords dig their graves.
I'll tell ye all my fears, one single valour,
the virtues of the valiant Caratach
more doubts me then all Britain: he's a Soldier
so forged out, and so tempered for great fortunes,
so much man thrust into him, so old in dangers,
so fortunate in all attempts, that his mere name
fights in a thousand men, himself in millions,
to make him Roman. But no more. Petillius,
how stands your charge?
Ready for all employments,
to be commanded too, Sir.
'T is well governed;
to morrow we'll draw out, and view the Cohorts:
in the mean time, all apply their Offices.
Whore's Junius?
In 's Cabin,
sick of the mumps, Sir.
How?
In love, indeed in love, most lamentably loving, to the tune of Queen Dido.
Alas poor Gentleman.
'T will make him fight the nobler. With what Lady?
I'll be a spokesman for him.
You'll scant speed, Sir.
Who is 't?
The devils dam, Bonduca's daughter,
her youngest, cracked in the ring.
I am sorry for him:
but sure his own discretion will reclaim him,
he must deserve our anger else. Good Captains,
apply your selves in all the pleasing forms
ye can, unto the Soldiers; fire their spirits,
and set 'em fit to run this action;
mine own provision shall be shared amongst 'em,
till more come in: tell 'em, if now they conquer,
the fat of all the kingdom lies before 'em,
their shames forgot, their honours infinite,
and want for ever banished. Two days hence,
our fortunes, and our swords, and gods be for us. 
I must come?
So the General commands, Sir.
I must bring up my Regiment?
Believe, Sir,
I bring no lye.
But did he say, I must come?
So delivered.
How long is 't, Regulus, since I commanded
in Britain here?
About five years, great Penyus.
The General some five months. Are all my actions
so poor, and lost, my services so barren,
that I 'm remembered in no nobler language
but Must come up?
I do beseech ye, Sir,
weigh but the times estate.
Yes, good Lieutenant,
I do, and his that sways it. Must come up?
Am I turned bare Centurion? Must, and shall,
fit embosses to court my honour?
Sir—
Set me to lead a handful of my men
against an hundred thousand barbarous slaves
that have marched name by name with Romes best doers?
serve 'em up some other meat; I'll bring no food
to stop the jaws of all those hungry wolfs.
My Regiment 's mine own. I must, my language.
Penyus, where lies the host?
Where Fate may find 'em.
Are they ingirt?
The Battel's lost.
So soon?
No; but 't is lost, because it must be won:
the Britains must be Victors. Who ere saw
a troop of bloody Vultures hovering
about a few corrupted carcases,
let him behold the silly Roman host,
girded with millions of fierce Britain Swains,
with deaths as many as they have had hopes;
and then go thither, he that loves his shame;
I scorn my life, yet dare not lose my name.
Do not you hold i• a most famous end,
when both our names and lives are sacrificed
for Romes increase?
Yes, Curius; but mark this too;
what glory is there, of what lasting fame
can be to Rome, or us? what full example,
when one is smothered with a multitude,
and crowded in amongst a nameless press?
Honour got out of flint, and on their heads
whose virtues, like the Sun, exhaled all valours,
must not be lost in mists and fogs of people,
notelesse, and out of name, but rude and naked:
nor can Rome task us with impossibilities,
or bid us fight against a flood: we serve her,
that she may proudly say she has good soldiers,
nor slaves to choke all hazards. Who but fools,
that make no difference betwixt certain dying,
and dying well, would fling their fems and fortunes
into this Britain-gulf, this quicksand-ruine,
that sinking, swallows us? What noble hand
can find a subject fit for blood there? or what sword
room for his execution? What air to cool us,
but poisoned with their blasting breaths and curses,
where we lie buried quick above the ground,
and are with labouring sweat, and breathless pain,
killed like to slaves, and cannot kill again?
Penyus, mark ancient Wars, and know that then Captains weighed an hundred thousand men.
Drusius, mark ancient wisdom, and you'll find then
he gave the overthrow that saved his men.
I must not go.
The soldiers are desirous,
their Eagles all drawn out, Sir.
Who drew up. Regulus?
ha? speak: did you? whose bold will durst attempt this?
drawn out? why, who commands, Sir? on whose warrant
durst they advance?
I keep mine own obedience.
'T is like the general cause, their love of honour, relieving of their wants.
Without my knowledge?
am I no more? my place but at their pleasures?
Come, who did this?
By— Sir, I am ignorant.
What, am I grown a shadow? Hark, they march.
I will know, and will be my self. Stand, disobedience;
he that advances one foot higher, dies for 't.
Run thorough the Regiment upon your duties,
and charge 'em on command: beat back again,
by—I'll tith'em all else.
We'll do our best.
Back; cease your bawling Drums there,
I'll beat the Tubs about your brains else. Back:
do I speak with less fear then Thunder to ye?
must I stand to beseech ye? home, home: ha?
do ye stare upon me? Are those minds I moulded,
those honest valiant tempers I was proud
to be a fellow to, those great discretions
made your names feared and honoured, turned to wildfires?
O gods, to disobedience? Command, farewell;
and be ye witness with me, all things sacred,
I have no share in these men's shames. March, Soldiers,
and seek your own sad ruins; your old Penyus
dares not behold your murders.
Captain.
Captain.
Dear honoured Captain•
Too too dear loved Soldiers,
which made ye weary of me: and heaven yet knows,
though in your mutinies, I dare not hate you;
Take your own wills; 't is fit your long experience
should now know how to rule your selves: I wrong ye,
in wishing ye to save your lives and credits,
to keep your necks whole from the Ax hangs ore ye:
alas, I much dishonoured ye: go, seek the Britains,
and say ye come to glut their Sacrifices;
but do not say I sent ye. What ye have been,
how excellent in all parts, good, and governed,
is only left of my Command, for story;
what now ye are, for pity. Fare ye well.
Oh turn again, great Penyus; see the Soldier in all points apt for duty.
See his sorrow
for his disobedience, which he says was haste,
and haste (he thought) to please you with. See, Captain,
the toughness of his courage turned to water;
see how his manly heart melts.
Go, beat homeward,
there learn to eat your little with obedience,
and henceforth strive to do as I direct ye.
My answer, Sir.
Tell the great General,
my Companies are no faggots to fill breaches;
my self no man that must, or shall, can carry:
bid him be wise; and where he is, he 's safe then;
and when he finds out possibilities,
he may command me. Commend me to the Captains.
All this I shall deliver.
Farewell, Miser. 
Pray gods this breed no mischief.
It must needs,
if stout Swetonius win; for then his anger,
besides the Soldiers loss of due, and honour,
will break together on him.
He's a brave fellow;
and but a little hide his haughtiness,
(which is but sometimes neither, on some causes)
he shows the worthiest Roman this day living.
You may, good Curius, to the General
make all things seem the best.
I shall endeavour:
pray for our fortunes, Gentlemen. If we fall,
this one farewell serves for a Funeral.
The gods make sharp our swords, and steel our hearts;
we dare, alas, but cannot fight our parts.
Let him go on: stay, now he talks.
Why?
why should I love mine enemy? what is beauty?
of what strange violence, that like the plague,
it works upon our spirits? blind they feign him,
I am sure, I find it so.
A dog shall lead ye.
His fond affections blinder.
Hold ye there still.
It takes away my sleep,
Alas, poor chicken.
my company, content; almost my fashion.
Yes, and your weight too, if you follow it.
It is sure the plague, for no man dare come near me without an Antidote: it is far worse; Hell.
Thou art damned without redemption then.
The way to 't
strewed with fair Western smiles, and April blushes,
led by the brightest constellations; eyes,
and sweet proportions, envying heaven: but from thence
no way to guide, no path, no wisdom brings us.
Yes, a smart water, Junius.
Do I fool?
know all this, and fool still? Do I know further,
that when we have enjoyed our ends, we lose 'em,
and all our appetites are but as dreams
wee laugh at in our ages.
Sweet Philosopher!
Do I know on still, and yet know nothing? Mer∣cie gods,
why am I thus ridiculous?
Motley on thee,
thou art an arrant Ass.
Can red and white,
an eye, a nose, a cheek,
But one cheek, Junius?
an half-fac'd Mistress?
with a little trim,
that wanton fools call Fashion, thus abuse me?
take me beyond my reason? Why should not I
dote on my horse well trapt, my sword well hatched?
they are as handsome things, to me more useful,
and possible to rule too. Did I but love,
yet it were excusable, my youth would bear it;
but to love there, and that no time can give me,
mine honour dare not ask: she has been ravished
my nature, must not know; she hates our Nation.
Thus to dispose my spirit!
Stay a little,
he will declaim again.
I will not love; I am a man, have reason,
and I will use it: I'll no more tormenting,
nor whining for a wench, there are a thousand,
Hold thee there boy.
A thousand will entreat me.
Ten thousand, Junius.
I am young and lusty,
and to my fashion valiant; can please nightly.
I'll swear thy back's probatum, for I have known thee
leap at sixteen like a strong Stallion.
I will be man again.
Now mark the working,
the devil and the spirit tug for it: twenty pound
upon the devils head.
I must be wretched.
I knew I had won.
Nor have I so much power
to shun my fortune.
I will hunt thy fortune
with all the shapes imagination breeds, 
but I will fright thy devil: S•ay, he sings now.
Must I be thus abused?
Yes mary must ye.
Let's follow him close: oh, there he is, now read it.
It is the Generals command, that all sick, persons old and unable, retire within the Trenches; hee that fears his liberty, to leave the Field: Fools, boys, and lovers must not come near the Regiments, for fear of their infect∣once; especially those Cowards they call Lovers.
Ho?
Read on.
If any common Soldier love an Enemy, hoe's whipped and made a slave: If any Captain; cast, with loss of honours, flung out of the Army, and made unable ever after to bear the name of a Soldier.
The — consume ye all, Rogues. 
Let this work:
he has something now to chew upon: he's gone,
come, shake no more.
Well, Sir, you may command me,
but not to doe the like again for Europe:
I would have given my life for a bent two-pence.
If I ere read to lovers whilst I live again,
or come within their confines —
There's your payment,
and keep this private.
I am schooled for talking. 
How now, Demetrius, are we drawn?
It is doing:
Your Company stands fair; but pray ye, whore's Junius?
half his command are wanting, with some forty
that Decius leads.
Hunting for victuals:
upon my life free-booting Rogues, their stomachs
are like a widows lust, ne'er satisfied.
I wonder how they dare stir, knowing the enemy
Master of all the Country.
Resolute hungers
know neither fears, nor faiths, they tread on ladders,
ropes, gallows, and overdo all dangers.
They may be hanged though.
There's their joyful supper,
and no doubt they are at it.
But for heavens sake,
how does young Junius?
Drawing on, poor Gentleman.
What, to his end?
To th'end of all fl•sh: woman.
This Love has made him a stout soldier.
O, a great one,
fit to command young goslings: but what news?
I think the messenger's come back from Penyus by this time, let's go know.
What will you say now
if he deny to come, and take exceptions
at some half syllable, or sound delivered
with an ill accent, or some stile left out?
I cannot think he dare.
He dare speak treason,
dare say, what no man dares believe, dares doe—
but that's all one: I'll lay you my black armour
to twenty crowns, he comes not.
Done.
You'll pay.
I will.
Then keep thine old use Penyus,
be stubborn and vain glorious, and I thank thee.
Come let's go pray for six hours: most of us
I fear, will trouble heaven no more: two good blows
struck home at two Commanders of the Britains,
and my part's done.
I do not think of dying.
It is possible we may live. But Demetrius,
with what strange legs, and arms, and eyes, and noses,
let Carpenters and Copper-smiths consider.
If I can keep my heart whole, and my wind-pipe,
that I may drink yet like a Soldier —
Come, let's have better thoughts; mine's on your Armour.
Mine's in your purse, Sir: Let's go try the wager.
Come, hang 'm presently.
What made your Rogueships
harrying for victuals here? Are we your friends?
or doe you come for Spies? tell me directly,
Would you not willingly be hanged now? do not ye long for it?
What say ye? shall wee hang in this vain? Hang we must,
and it is as good to dispatch it merrily,
as pull an arse like dogs to it.
Any way,
so it be handsome.
I had as lief it were toothsome too: but all agree, and I'll not out Boys.
Let's hang pleasantly.
Then pleasantly be it: Captain, the truth is,
we had as lief hang with meat in our mouths,
as ask your pardon empty.
These are brave hungers.
What say you to a leg of Beef now, sirha?
Bring me acquainted with it, and I'll tell ye.
Torment 'em wenches: I must back; then hang 'em.
We humbly thank your Grace.
The Rogues laugh at us.
Sirha, What think you of a wench now?
A wench, Lady?
I do beseech your Ladyship, retire,
I'll tell ye presently, ye see the time's short;
one crash; even to the settling of my conscience.
Why, is it no more but up, boys?
Yes, ride too Captain.
Will you but see my seat?
Ye shall be set, Sir,
upon a Jade shall shake ye.
Sheets, good Madam,
will do it ten times better.
Whips, good Soldier,
which ye shall taste before ye hang, to mortify ye;
it is pity ye should die thus desperate.
These are the merry Romans, the brave mad-caps.
it is ten to one we'll cool your resolutions.
Bring out the whips.
Would your good Ladyships
would exercise 'em too.
Surely Ladies,
we'ld show you a strange patience.
Hang 'em, Rascals,
they'll talk thus on the wheel. 
Now what's the matter?
What are these fellows? whats the crime committed,
that they wear necklaces?
They are Roman Rogues,
taken a foraging.
Is that all, Nennius?
Would I were fairly hanged; this is the devil,
the kill-cow Caratach.
And you would hang 'em.
Are they not enemies?
My breech makes buttons.
Are they not our tormentors?
Tormentors? Flea-traps.
Pluck off your halters, fellows.
Take heed, Caratach,
taint not your wisdom.
Wisdom, Nennius?
why, who shall fight against us, make our honours,
and give a glorious day into our hands,
if we dispatch our foes thus? what's their offence?
stealing a loaf or two to keep out hunger,
a piece of greazie bacon, or a pudding?
do these deserve the gallows? They are hungry,
poor hungry knaves, no meat at home left, starved:
Art thou not hungry?
Monstrous hungry.
He looks like hungers self: get 'em some victuals, and wine to cheer their hearts, quick: Hang up poor pile∣chers?
This is the bravest Captain —
Caratach,
I'll leave you to your will.
I'll answer all, Sir.
Let's up, and view his entertainment of 'em.
I am glad they are shifted any way, their tongues else
would still have murdered us.
Let's up, and see it. 
Sit down poor knaves: why, whore's this wine
and victuals?
who waits there?
Sir, it is coming.
Who are these Uncle?
They are Romans, Boy.
Are these they
that vex mine Aunt so? can these fight? they look
like empty scabbards, all, no mettle in 'em,
like men of clouts, set to keep crows from orchards;
why, I dare fight with these.
That's my good chicken. And how do ye?
how do you feel your stomachs?
Wondrous apt, Sir,
as shall appear when time calls.
That's well, down with it,
a little grace will serve your turns: eat softly,
you'll choke ye knaves else: give 'em wine.
Not yet, Sir,
we're even a little busy.
Can that fellow
do any thing but eat? thou fellow.
Away Boy,
away, this is no boys play.
By —, Uncle,
if his valour lie in's teeth, he's the most valiant.
I am glad to hear ye talk, Sir.
Good Uncle tell me,
What's the price of a couple of crammed Romans?
Some twenty Britains boy; these are good soldiers,
Do not the cowards eat hard too?
No more, boy.
Come, I'll sit with you too; sit down by me, boy.
Pray bring your dish then.
Hearty knaves: More meat there.
That's a good hearing.
Stay now and pledge me.
This little piece Sir.
By — square eaters,
More meat I say: upon my conscience
the poor Rogues have not eat this month: how terribly
they charge upon their victuals: dare ye fight thus?
Believe it sir, like devils.
Well said famine,
Here's to thy General.
Most excellent Captain, I will now pledge thee.
And to morrow night, say to him,
His head is mine.
I can assure ye Captain,
He will not give it for this washing.
Well said. 
Here's a strange entertainment: how the thieves drink.
Danger is dry, they looked for colder liquor.
Fil'em more wine, give 'em full bowls; which of you all now
in recompense of this good, dare but give me
a sound knock in the Battle?
Delicate Captain,
to doe thee a sufficient recompense,
I'll knock thy brains out.
Do it.
Thou dare as well be damned: thou knock his brains out,
thou skin of man? Uncle, I will not hear this.
Tie up your whelp.
Thou kill my Uncle?
Would I had but a sword for thy sake, thou dried dog.
What a mettle
this little vermin caries.
Kill mine Uncle?
He shall not, child.
He cannot: he's a Rogue,
an only eating Rogue: Kill my sweet Uncle?
oh that I were a man.
By this wine,
which I will drink to Captain Junius,
who loves the Queens most excellent Majesties little daughter
most sweetly, and most fearfully, I will do it.
Uncle, I'll kill him with a great pin.
No more, Boy.
I'll pledge thy Captain: To ye all, good Fellows.
In love with me? that love shall cost your lives all:
Come Sister, and advise me; I have here
a way to make an easy conquest of 'em,
if fortune favour me.
Let's see ye sweat
to morrow, blood and spirit, Boys, this wine
turned to sterne valour.
Hark ye Judas,
if he should hang us after all this.
Let him:
I'll hang like a Gentleman, and a Roman.
Take away there,
they have enough.
Captain, wee thank you heartily
for your good cheer, and if we meet to morrow,
one of us pays for it.
Get 'em guides, their wine 
has over mastered 'em.
That hungry fellow
with the red beard there, give it him, and this,
to see it well delivered.
Farewell, knaves;
speak nobly of us, keep your words to morrow,
and doe something worthy your meat. Go, guide 'em,
and see 'em fairly onward.
Meaning me, Sir?
The same.
The youngest daughter to the Queen entreats ye
to give this privately to Captain Junius,
this for your pains.
I rest her humble servant.
Commend me to thy Lady. Keep your files, boys.
I must instruct ye farther.
Keep your files there.
Order, sweet friends: faces about now.
Here Sir,
here lies your way.
'Blesse the founders, I say.
Fairly, good soldiers, fairly march now: close, boys.
Bid me be wise, and keep me where I am,
and so be safe: not come, because commanded;
Was it not thus?
It was, Sir.
What now think ye?
Must come, so heinous to him, so distasteful?
Give me my money.
I confess it is due Sir,
and presently I'll pay it.
His obedience
so blind at his years and experience,
it cannot find where to be tendered?
Sir,
the Regiment was willing, and advanced too,
the Captains at all points steeled up; their preparations
full of resolve, and confidence; Youth and fire,
like the fair breaking of a glorious day,
gilded their Falanx: when the angry Penyus
stepped like a stormy cloud twixt them and hopes.
And stopped their resolutions?
True: his reason
to them was odds, and odds so infinite,
discretion durst not look upon.
Well Penyus,
I cannot think thee coward yet; and treacherous
I dare not think: thou hast lopped a limb off from me,
and let it be thy glory, thou wast stubborn,
thy wisdom, that thou left thy General naked:
Yet ere the Sun set, I shall make thee see,
all valour dwells not in thee; all command
in one experience. Thou wilt too late repent this,
and wish, I must come up, had been thy blessing.
Let's force him.
No, by no means; he's a torrent
we cannot easily stem.
I think, a Traitor.
No il words: let his own shame first revile him.
That wine I have, see it (Demetrius)
distributed amongst the soldiers,
to make 'em high and lusty: when that's done,
Petillius, give the word through, that the Eagles
may presently advance: no man discover,
upon his life, the enemies full strength,
but make it of no value: Decius,
are your starved people yet come home?
I hope so.
Keep 'em in more obedience: This is no time
to chide, I could be angry else, and say more to ye:
But come, let's order all: whose sword is sharpest,
and valour equal to his sword this day,
shall be my saint.
We shall be holy all then. 
Captain, Captain, I have brought 'em off again;
the drunkenest slaves.
— confound your Rogueships;
I'll call the General, and have ye hanged all.
Pray who will you command then?
For you, sirha,
that are the ring-leader to these devises,
whose maw is never crammed, I'll have an engine.
A wench, sweet Captain.
Sweet Judas, even the Forks.
where ye shall have two Lictors with two whips
hammer your hide.
Captain, good words, fair words,
sweet words, good Captain; if you like not us,
farewell, we have employment.
Where hast thou been?
There where you dare not be with all your valour.
Whore's that?
With the best good-fellow living.
The king of all good-fellows.
Who's that?
Caratach.
Shake now, and say, wee have done something worthy,
mark me; with Caratach: By this — Caratach:
Do you as much now and you dare: sweet Caratach.
Ye talk of a good fellow, of true drinking;
well, go thy ways, old Caratach: besides the drink Captain,
the bravest running banquet of black puddings,
pieces of glorious beef.
How escaped ye hanging?
Hanging's a dogs death: we are Gentlemen,
and I say still, Old Caratach.
Belike then,
you are turned Rebels all.
We are Roman boys all,
and boys of mettle: I must doe that Captain,
this day, this very day.
Away, ye Rascal.
Fair words, I say again.
What must you doe, Sir?
I must do that my heart-strings yearn to do:
but my word's past.
What is it?
Why, kill Caratach.
that's all he asked us for our entertainment.
More then you'll pay.
Would I had sold my self
unto the skin, I had not promised it:
for such another Caratach.
Come Fool,
have ye done your Country service?
I have brought that
to Captain Iunius.
How?
I think will doe all:
I cannot tell, I think so.
How? to Iunius?
I'll more enquire of this: You'll fight now?
Promise:
take heed of promise, Captain.
Away, and rank then.
But hark ye Captain, there is wine distributing,
I would fain know what share I have.
Be gone,
ye have too much.
Captain, no wine, no fighting.
there's one called Caratach, that has wine.
Well Sir,
if you'll be ruled now, and doe well.
Doe excellent.
Ye shall have wine, or any thing: go file;
I'll see ye have your share: drag out your dormice,
and stow 'em somwhere, where they may sleep handsomely,
they'll hear a hunt's up shortly.
Now I love thee:
but no more Forks nor Whips.
Deserve 'em not then:
up with your men, I'll meet ye presently;
and get 'em sober quickly.
Arm, arm, Bullies;
ell's right again and straight; and which is more,
more wine, more wine: Awake ye men of Memphis,
be sober and discreet, we have much to do boys. 
Prepare there for the Sacrifice, the Queen comes.
Ye powerful gods of Britain, hear our prayers;
hear us you great Revengers, and this day
take pity from our swords, doubt from our valours,
double the sad remembrance of our wrongs
in every breast; the vengeance due to those
make infinite and endless: on our pikes
this day pale terror sit, horrors and ruins
upon our executions; claps of thunder
hang on our armed carts, and before our Troops
despair and death; shame beyond these attend 'em.
Rise from the dust, ye relics of the dead,
whose noble deeds our holy Druids sing,
oh rise, ye valiant bones, let not base earth
oppress your honours, whilst the pride of Rome
treads on your Stocks, and wipes out all your stories.
Thou great Tiranes, whom our sacred Priests,
armed with dreadful thunder, place on high
above the rest of the immortal gods,
send thy consuming fires and deadly bolts,
and shoot 'em home; stick in each Roman heart
a fear fit for confusion; blast their spirits,
dwell in 'em to destruction; thorough their Phalanx
strike, as thou strik'st a proud tree; shake their Bodies,
make their strengths totter, and their topless fortunes
unroot, and reel to ruin.
O thou god,
thou feared god, if ever to thy justice
insulting wrongs, and ravishments of women,
women derived from thee, their shames, the sufferings
of those that daily filled thy Sacrifice
with virgin incense, have access, now hear me,
now snatch thy thunder up, now on these Romans,
despisers of thy power, of us defacers,
revenge thy self: take to thy killing anger,
to make thy great work full, thy justice spoken,
an utter rooting from this blessed Isle
of what Rome is or has been.
Give more incense,
the gods are deaf and drowsy; no happy flame
rises to raise our thoughts: Pour on.
See heaven,
and all you powers that guide us, see, and shame
we kneel so long for pity over your Altars;
since it is no light oblation that you look for,
no incense offering, will I hang mine eyes;
and as I wear these stones with hourly weeping,
so will I melt your powers into compassion.
This tear for Prosutagus my brave Father,
ye gods, now think on Rome; this for my Mother,
and all her miseries; yet see, and save us:
but now ye must be open eyed. See, heaven,
O see thy showrs stolen from thee; our dishonours,
O sister, our dishonours: can ye be gods,
and these sins smothered?
The fire takes.
It does so,
but no flame rises. Cease your fetrfull prayers,
your whinings, and your tame petitions;
the gods love courage armed with confidence,
and prayers fit to pull them down: weak tears
and troubled hearts, the dull twins of cold spirits,
they sit and smile at. Hear how I salute 'em:
Divine Audit, thou who hold the reins
of furious Battles, and disordered War,
and proudly roll'st thy swarthy chariot wheels
over the heaps of wounds, and carcasses,
sailing through seas of blood; thou sure-steel'd sternness,
give us this day good hearts, good enemies,
good blows of both sides, wounds that fear or flight
can claim no share in; steel us both with angers,
and warlike executions fit thy viewing;
let Rome put on her best strength, and thy Britain,
thy little Britain, but as great in fortune,
meet her as strong as she, as proud, as daring;
and then look on, thou red eyed god: who does best,
reward with honour; who despair makes fly,
unarme for ever, and brand with infamy:
Grant this, divine Audit, 't is but Justice;
and my first blow thus on thy holy Altar 
I sacrifice unto thee.
It flames out. 
Now sing ye Druids. 
It is out again.
He has given us leave to fight yet; we ask no more,
the rest hangs in our resolutions:
tempt him no more.
I would know further Cousin,
His hidden meaning dwells in our endeavours;
our valours are our best gods. Cheer the soldier,
and let him eat.
He's at it, Sir.
Away then;
when he has done, let's march. Come, fear not Lady,
this day the Roman gains no more ground here,
but what his body lies in.
Now I am confident. 
We dare not hazard it: beside our lives,
it forfeits all our understandings.
Gentlemen,
Can ye forsake me in so just a service,
a service for the Common-wealth, for honour?
Read but the Letter; you may love too.
Read it:
if there be any safety in the circumstance,
or likelihood it is love, we will not fail ye.
Read it good Curius.
Willingly.
Now mark it.
Health to thy heart, my honoured Junius,
and all thy love requited: I am thine,
thine everlastingly, thy love has won me,
and let it breed no doubt; our new acquaintance
compels this, it is the gods decree to bless us.
The times are dangerous to meet; yet fail not,
by all the love thou bear me I conjure thee,
without distrust of danger, to come to me,
for I have purposed a delivery
both of my self and fortune this blessed day
into thy hands, if thou think good: to show thee
how infinite my love is, even my Mother
shall be thy prisoner, the day yours without hazard;
for I beheld your danger like a Lover,
a just affecter of thy faith: Thy goodness,
I know, will use us nobly, and our marriage,
if not redeem, yet lessen Romes Ambition.
I am weary of these miseries: Use my Mother,
(if you intend to take her) with all honour,
and let this disobedience to my parents
be laid on love, not me. Bring with thee, Junius,
spirits resolved to fetch me off, the noblest,
forty will serve the turn; just at the joining
of both the Battles, we will be weakly guarded;
and for a guide, within this hour shall reach thee
a faithful friend of mine: the gods, my Junius,
keep thee, and me to serve thee: Young Bonvica.
This letter carries much belief, and most objections
answered, we must have doubted.
Is that fellow
come to ye for a guide yet?
Yes.
And examined?
Far more then that; he has felt tortures, yet
he vows he knows no more then this truth.
Strange.
If she mean what she writes, as 't may be probable,
twill be the happiest vantage we can lean to.
I'll pawn my soul she means truth.
Think an hour more,
then if your confidence grow stronger on ye,
we'll set in with ye.
Nobly done; I thank ye;
ye know the time.
We will be either ready
to give ye present counsel, or join with ye.
No more as ye are Gentlemen. The General.
Draw out a pace, the enemy waits for us;
Are ye all ready?
All our Troops attend, Sir.
I am glad to hear you say so, Junius.
I hope ye are dispossessed.
I hope so too, Sir.
Continue so. And Gentlemen, to you now;
To bid you fight is needless, ye are Romans,
the name will fight it self; To tell ye who
you go to fight against, his power, and nature,
but loss of time: ye know it, know it poor,
and oft have made it so. To tell ye further,
his Body shows more dreadful then it has done,
to him that fears, less possible to deal with,
is but to stick more honour on your Actions,
load ye with virtuous names, and to your memories
tie never dying time, and fortune constant.
Go on in full assurance, draw your swords
as daring and as confident as Justice;
the gods of Rome fight for ye; loud Fame calls ye,
pitched on the topless Perinine, and blows
to all the under world: all Nations,
the seas, and unfrequented deserts, where the snow dwells,
wakens the ruined monuments, and there
where nothing but eternal death and sleep is,
informs again the dead bones. With your virtues,
go on, I say, valiant and wise, rule heaven,
and all the great aspects attend 'em. Do but blow
upon this Enemy, who, but that we want foes,
cannot deserve that name; and like a mist,
a lazy fog, before your burning valours
you'll find him fly to nothing. This is all,
We have swords, and are the sons of ancient Romans,
heirs to their endless valours, fight and conquer.
It is done.
That man that loves not this day,
and hugs not in his arms the noble danger,
may he die famelesse and forgot.
Sufficient,
up to your Troops, and let your drums beat thunder,
march close, and sudden like a tempest: all executions
done without sparkling of the Body: keep your phalanx
sure lined, and pieced together; your pikes forward,
and so march like a moving Fort: ere this day run,
we shall have ground to add to Rome, well won. 
The Roman is advanced from yound' hills brow,
we may behold him, Caratach. 
Let's thither,
I see the dust fly. Now I see the Body,
observe 'em, Nennius; by — a handsome Body,
and of a few, strongly and wisely jointed
Swetonius is a Soldier.
As I take it,
that's hee that gallops by the Regiments,
viewing their preparations.
Very likely,
he shows no less then General: see how bravely
the Body moves, and in the head how proudly
the Captains stick like plumes: hee comes apace on;
good Nennius go, and bid my stout Leutenant
bring on the first square Body to oppose 'em,
and as he charges, open to enclose 'em:
the Queen move next with hers, and wheel about,
to gain their backs, in which I'll lead the Vanguard.
We shall have bloody crowns this day, I see by 't;
Haste thee good Nennius, I'll follow instantly.
How close they march, as if they grew together? 
no place but lined alike: sure from oppression;
they will not change this figure: we must charge 'em,
and charge 'em home at both ends, Van and Rear,
they never totter else. I hear our Music,
and must attend it: Hold good sword, but this day,
and bite hard where I hound thee, and hereafter
I'll make a relic of thee, for young Soldiers
to come like Pilgrims to, and kiss for Conquests.
Now is the time, the fellow stays.
What think ye?
I think it is true.
Alas, if it were a question,
if any doubt or hazard fell into 't,
do ye think mine own discretion so self-blinde,
my care of you so naked, to run headlong?
Let's take Petillius with us.
By no means:
hoe's never wise but to himself, nor courteous,
but where the end's his own: we are strong enough,
if not too many. Behind yonder hill
the fellow tells me she attends, weak guarded,
her Mother and her Sister.
I would venture.
Wee shall not strike five blows for it: weigh the good,
the general good may come.
Away, I'll with ye,
but with what doubt?
Fear not, my soul for all. 
Here ye may see 'em all, Sir; from this hill
the Country shows off level.
Gods defend me,
what multitudes they are, what infinites?
the Roman power shows like a little Star
hedged with a double hello. Now the knell rings,
Hark how they shout to the battle; how the air
totters and reels, and rends apiece, Drusus,
with the huge vollied clamours.
Now they charge.
oh gods, of all sides, fearfully.
Little Rome,
stand but this growing Hydra one short hour,
and thou hast out-done Hercules.
The dust hides 'em,
we cannot see what follows.
They are gone,
gone, swallowed, Drusus; this eternal Sun
shall never see 'em march more.
O turn this way,
and see a model of the field, some forty,
against four hundred.
Well fought, bravely followed;
O nobly charged again, charged home too: Drusus,
they seem to carry it: now they charge all, 
close, close, I say; they follow it: ye gods,
Can there be more in men? more daring spirits?
still they make good their fortunes. Now they are gone too,
for ever gone: see Drusus, at their backs
a fearful Ambush rises. Farewell valours,
excellent valours: O Rome, Whore's thy wisdom?
They are gone indeed, Sir.
Look out toward the Army,
I am heavy with these slaughters.
It is the same still,
covered with dust and fury. 
Bring 'em in,
tie 'em, and then unarm 'em.
Valiant Romans,
ye are welcome to your Loves,
Your death, fools.
We deserve 'em,
and women do your worst.
Ye need not beg it.
Which is kind Junius?
This.
Are you my sweet heart?
It looks ill on it: how long is 't, pretty soul,
since you and I first loved? Had we not reason
to dote extremely upon one another?
How does my Love? this is not he: my chicken
could prate finely, sing a love-song.
Monster.
Oh, now it courts.
Armed with more malice
then he that got thee has the devil.
Good.
Proceed, sweet Chick.
I hate thee, that's my last.
Nay, and ye love me, forward: No? Come sister,
let's prick our answers on our arrows points,
and make 'em laugh a little. Ye damned Lechers,
ye proud improvident fools, have we now caught ye?
are ye i'th'noose? Since ye are such loving creatures,
we'll be your Cupids: Do ye see these arrows?
we'll send 'em to your wanton livers, goats.
O how I'll trample on your hearts, ye villains,
ambitious salt-itcht slaves: Romes master sins,
the mountain Rams topped your hot mothers.
Dogs,
to whose brave Founders a salt whore gave suck;
thieves, honours hangmen, do ye grin? perdition
take me for ever, if in my fell anger, 
I doe not out-doe all example.
Where,
where are these Ladies? ye keep noble quarter,
your mother thinks ye dead or taken; upon which,
she will not move her Battle. Sure these faces
I have beheld and known, they are Roman Leaders,
How came they here?
A trick Sir, that we used,
a certain policy conducted 'em
unto our snare: we have done ye no small service;
these used as we intend, we are for the battle.
As you intend? taken by treachery?
Is it not allowed?
Those that should gild our Conquest,
make up a Battle worthy of our winning,
caught up by craft?
By any means that's lawful.
A women's wisdom in our triumphs? Out,
out ye sluts, ye follies; from our swords
filch our revenges basely? Arm again, Gentlemen:
Soldiers, I charge ye help 'em.
By — Uncle,
we will have vengeance for our rapes.
By —
you should have kept your legs close then: dispatch there.
I will not off thus.
He that stirs to execute,
or she, though it be your selves, by him that got me,
shall quickly feel mine anger: one great day given us,
not to be snatched out of our hands but basely;
and must we shame the gods from whence we have it,
with setting snares for Soldiers? I'll run away first,
be hooted at, and children call me coward,
before I set up scales for Victories:
Give 'em their swords.
O gods.
Bear off the women
unto their Mother.
One shot, gentle Uncle.
One cut her fiddle-string: Beat'em off I say.
The — take this fortune.
Learn to spin,
and curse your knotted hemp: go Gentlemen,
safely go off, up to your troops: be wiser,
there thank me like tall Soldiers: I shall seek ye.
A noble worth.
Well Junius.
Pray ye no more.
He blushes, do not load him.
Whore's your love now? 
Puff, there it flies: Come, let's redeem our follies.
Awake, Sir; yet the Roman Bodie's whole,
I see 'em clear again.
Whole? it is not possible:
Drusus, they must be lost.
By — they are whole, Sir,
and in brave doing; see, they wheel about
to gain more ground.
But see there Drusus, see,
see that huge Battle moving from the mountains,
their gilt coats shine like Dragons scales, their march
like a rough tumbling storm; see them, and view 'em,
and then see Rome no more: say they fail; look,
look where the armed carts stand; a new Army:
look how they hang like falling rocks, as murdering
death rides in triumph Drusus: fell destruction
lashes his fiery horse, and round about him
his many thousand ways to let out souls.
Move me again when they charge, when the mountain
melts under their hot wheels, and from their Ax'trees
huge claps of thunder plough the ground before 'em,
till then I'll dream what Rome was.
O bravely fought; honour till now ne'er showed
her golden face in the field. Like lions, Gentlemen,
y' have held your heads up this day: Whore's young Junius,
Curius, and Decius?
Gone to heaven, I think, Sir.
Their words go with 'em: breath a while: How do ye?
Well; some few scurvy wounds, my heart's whole yet.
Would they would give us more ground.
Give? we'll have it.
Have it? and hold it too, despite the devil.
Lead up to the head, and line sure: the Qc. Battle begins to charge like wild-fire: Whore's the General?
Oh, they are living yet. Come, my brave soldiers,
come, let me power Romes blessing on ye; Live,
live, and lead Armies all: ye bleed hard.
Best:
wee sh•ll appear the sterner to the foe.
More wounds, more honour.
Lose no time.
Away then,
and stand this shock, ye have stood the world.
We'll grow to it.
Is not this better now then lousy loving?
I am my self, Petillius.
It is I love thee. 
Charge 'em in the flanks: O ye have plaid the fool, the fool extremely, the mad fool.
Why Cousin?
The woman fool. Why did you give the word
unto the carts to charge down, and our people
in gross before the Enemy? we pay for it,
our own swords cut our throats: why? — on it,
Why do you offer to command? the devil,
the devil, and his dam too, who bid you
meddle in men's affairs? 
I'll help all.
Home,
home and spin woman, spin, go spin, ye trifle.
Open before there, or ell's ruin. How, 
now comes the tempest; on our selves, by—
O woman, scurvy woman, beastly woman. 
Victoria, Victoria.
How's that, Drusus?
They win, they win, they win; oh look, look, look, Sir, for heavens sake look, the Britains fly, the Britains fly. Vi∣ctoria. 
Soft, soft, pursue it soft; excellent Soldiers,
close, my brave fellows, honourable Romans:
oh cool thy mettle Junius, they are ours,
the world cannot redeem 'em: stern Petillius,
govern the conquest nobly: soft, good Soldiers.
Shame, whither fly ye, ye unlucky Britains?
Will ye creep into your mothers wombs again? Back cowards,
Hares, fearful Hares, Doves in your angers; leave me?
leave your Queen desolate? her haplesse children
to Roman rape again and fury?
Fly, ye buzzards,
ye have wings enough, ye fear: get thee gone, woman,
shame tread upon thy heels: ell's lost, ell's lost, hark,
hark how the Romans ring our knels. 
Good Uncle,
let me go too.
No boy, thy fortune's mine,
I must not leave thee; get behind me; shake not,
I'll breech ye, if ye do boy: Come, brave Romans,
all is not lost yet.
Now I'll thank thee, Caratach. 
Thou art a Soldier: strike home, home; have at ye.
His blows fall like huge sledges on an anvil.
I am weary.
So am I.
Send more swords to me.
Let's sit and rest. 
What think ye now?
O Drusus,
I have lost mine honour, lost my name,
lost all that was my light: these are true Romans,
and I a Britain coward, a base coward;
guide me where nothing is but desolation,
that I may never more behold the face
of man, or mankind know me: O blind Fortune,
hast thou abused me thus?
Good Sir, be comforted;
it was your wisdom ruled ye; pray ye go home,
your day is yet to come, when this great fortune
shall be but foil unto it. 
Fool, fool, Coward. 
Draw in, draw in: well have ye fought, and worthy
Romes noble recompense; look to your wounds,
the ground is cold and hurtful: the proud Queen
has got a Fort, and there she and her Daughters
defy us once again. To morrow morning
we'll seek her out, and make her know, our Fortunes
stop at no stubborn walls: Come, sons of honour,
true virtues heirs; thus hatched with Britain blood,
let's us march to rest, and set in gulls like Suns.
Beat a soft march, and each one ease his neighbours.
Smooth was his cheek,
And his chin it was sleek,
With whoop, he has done wooing.
Junius was this Captains name,
A lad for a lasses viewing,
Full black his eye, &amp; plump his thigh.
Made up for loves pursuing:
Smooth was his cheek,
And his chin it was sleek.
With whoop, he has done wooing.
O my vexed thief, art thou come home again?
are thy brains perfect?
Sound as bells.
Thy back-worm
quiet, and cast his sting, boy?
Dead, Petillius,
dead to all folly, and now my anger only.
Why, that's well said: hang Cupped and his quiver,
a drunken brawling Boy; thy honoured saint
be thy ten shillings, Junius; there's the money,
and there's the ware; square dealing: this but sweats thee
like a nesh nag, and makes thee look pin buttocked;
the other runs thee whining up and down
like a pig in a storm, fills thy brains full of ballads,
and shows thee like a long Lent, thy brave body
turned to a tail of green-fish without butter.
When thou love next, love a good cup of wine,
a Mistress for a King, she leaps to kiss thee,
her red and white's her own; she makes good blood,
takes none away; what she heats sleep can help,
without a groping Surgeon.
I am counselled,
and henceforth, when I dote again, —
Take heed,
ye had almost paid for it.
Love no more great Ladies,
thou can not step amiss then; there's no delight in 'em;
ell's in the whistling of their snatched up silks;
they're only made for handsome view, not handling;
their bodies of so weak and wash a temper,
a rough-pac'd bed will shake 'em all to pieces;
a tough hen pulls their teeth out, tyres their souls;
plenae rimarum sunt, they are full of rynnet,
and take the skin off where they are tasted; shun 'em,
they live in cullisses like rotten cocks
stewed to a tenderness, that holds no tack:
Give me a thing I may crush.
Thou speak truly:
the Wars shall be my Mistress now.
Well chosen,
for she's a bouncing lass, she'll kiss thee at night, boy,
and break thy pate in the morning.
Yesterday
I found those favours infinite.
Wench good enough,
but that she talks too loud.
She talks to the purpose,
which never woman did yet: she'll hold grappling,
and he that lays on best, is her best servant:
all other loves are mere catching of dotrels,
stretching of legs out only, and trim laziness. 
Here comes the General. 
I am glad I have found ye:
Are those come in yet that pursued bold Caratach?
Not yet Sir, for I think they mean to lodge him;
take him I know they dare not, twill be dangerous.
Then haste Petillius, haste to Penyus,
I fear the strong conceit of what disgrace
he has pulled upon himself, will be his ruin:
I fear his soldiers fury too; haste presently,
I would not lose him for all Britain. Give him, Petillius,
That that shall choke him.
all the noble counsel,
his fault forgiven too, his place, his honour,
For me, I think, as handsome.
all the comfort;
and tell the Soldier, it was on our command
hee drew not to the Battle.
I conceive Sir,
and will doe that shall cure all.
Bring him with ye
before the Queens Fort, and his Forces with him,
there you shall find us following of our Conquest:
Make haste.
The best I may. 
And noble Gentlemen,
Up to your Companies: we'll presently
upon the Queens pursuit: There's nothing done
till she be seized; without her nothing won. 
How does my Boy?
I would doe well, my heart's well;
I doe not fear.
My good boy.
I know, Uncle,
we must all die; my little brother died,
I saw him die, and he died smiling: sure,
there's no great pain in it Uncle. But pray tell me,
Whither must we go when we are dead?
Strange questions!
why, to the blessed'st place Boy: ever sweetness
and happiness dwells there.
Will you come to me?
Yes, my sweet boy.
Mine Aunt too, and my Cousins?
All, my good child.
No Romans, Uncle?
No, boy.
I should be loath to meet them there.
No ill men,
that live by violence, and strong oppression,
come thither: 't is for those the gods love, good men.
Why, then I care not when I go; for surely
I am persuaded they love me: I never
blasphemed 'em, Uncle, nor transgressed my parents;
I always said my prayers.
Thou shalt go, then,
indeed thou shalt.
When they please.
That's my good boy.
Art thou not weary, Hengo?
Weary, Uncle?
I have heard you say you have marched all day in Armour.
I have, boy.
Am not I your kinsman?
Yes.
And am not I as fully allied unto you
in those brave things, as blood?
Thou art too tender.
To go upon my legs? they were made to bear me:
I can play twenty mile a day; I see no reason
but, to preserve my Country and my self,
I should march forty.
What, would thou be
living to wear a mans strength?
Why a Caratach,
a Romane-hater, a scourge sent from heaven 
to whip these proud thieves from our kingdom. Hark,
hark, Uncle, hark, I hear a Drum.
Beat softly,
softly, I say; they are here: who dare charge?
He
that dares be knocked of the head: I'll not come near him.
Retire again, and watch then. How he stares!
h' as eyes would kill a dragon: mark the boy well;
if we could take or kill him. A — on ye,
how fierce ye look? see how he broods the boy;
the devil dwells in's scabbard. Back, I say,
apace, apace, h' as found us. 
Do ye hunt us?
Uncle, good Uncle see, the thin starved Rascal,
the eating Roman, see where he thirds the thickets:
kill him, dear Uncle, kill him; one good blow
to knock his brains into his breech: strike's head off,
that I may peace in 's face.
Do ye make us Foxes?
Here, hold my charging-staff, and keep the place, boy.
I am at bay, and like a bull I'll bear me.
Stand, stand, ye Rogues, ye Squirrels. 
Now he pays 'em:
O that I had a mans strength.
Here's the boy;
mine own, I thank my Fortune.
Uncle, uncle;
famine is fallen upon me, uncle.
Come, Sir,
yield willingly, your uncle 's out of hearing;
I'll tickle your young tail else.
I defy thee,
thou mock-made man of mat: charge home, sitha:
hang thee, base slave, thou shake.
Upon my conscience
the boy will beat me: how it looks, how bravely,
how confident the worm is: a scabbed boy
to handle me thus? yield, or I cut thy head off.
Thou dare not cut my finger: here 't is, touch it.
The boy speaks sword and buckler. Prithee yield, boy:
come, here 's an apple; yield.
By— he fears me.
I'll give you sharper language: When, ye coward,
when come ye up?
If he should beat me—
When, Sir?
I long to kill thee; come, thou can not scope me,
I have twenty ways to charge thee; twenty deaths
attend my bloody staff.
Sure 't is the devil,
a dwarf, devil in a doubler.
I have killed a Captain, sirha, a brave Captain, and when I have done. I have kicked him thus. Look here, see how I charge this staff.
Most certain
this boy will cut my throat, yet.
Flee, flee, he kills us.
He comes, he comes.
The devil take the hindmost.
Run, run, ye Rogues, ye precious Rogues, ye rank Rogues.
A comes, a comes, a comes, a comes: that 's he, boys.
What a brave cry they make?
How does my chicken?
Faith, uncle, grown a Soldier, a great Soldier;
for by the virtue of your charging-staff,
and a strange fighting face I put upon 't,
I have outbrav'd hunger.
That's my boy, my sweet boy.
Here, here's a Roman 's head for thee.
Good provision.
Before I starve, my sweet-fac'd Gentleman,
I'll try your favour.
A right complete soldier.
Come, chicken, let's go seek some place of strength
(the Country 's full of Scouts) to rest a while in,
thou wilt not else be able to endure.
The journey to my Country, fruits, and water,
must be your food a while, boy.
Any thing:
I can eat moss, nay, I can live on anger,
to vex these Romans. Let 's be wary, Uncle.
I warrant thee; come cheerfully.
And boldly. 
The soldier shall not grieve ye.
Pray ye forsake me;
look not upon me, as ye love your Honours;
I am so cold a coward, my infection
will choke your virtues like a damp else.
Dear Captain.
Most honoured Sir.
Most hated, most abhorred;
say so, and then ye know me, nay, ye please me.
O my dear credit, my dear credit.
Sure
his mind is dangerous.
The good gods cure it.
My honour got thorough fire, thorough stubborn, breaches
thorough battles that have been as hard to win as heaven,
thorough death himself, in all his horrid trims,
is gone for ever, ever, ever, Gentlemen,
and now I am left to scornful tales and laughters,
to hootings at, pointing with fingers, That's he,
that's the brave Gentleman forsook the battle,
the most wise Penyus, the disputing coward.
O my good sword, break from my side, and kill me;
cut out the coward from my heart.
Ye are none.
He lies that says so: by— he lies, lies basely,
baser then I have done. Come, soldiers, seek me,
I have robbed ye of your virtues: Justice, seek me,
I have broke my fair obedience, lost: shame take me,
take me, and swallow me, make ballads of me;
shame, endless shame: and pray do you forsake me.
What shall we do?
Good Gentlemen forsake me:
you were not wont to be commanded. Friends, pray do it,
and do not fear; for as I am a coward
I will not hurt my self: when that mind takes me,
I'll call to you, and ask your help. I dare not.
Good morrow, Gentlemen; whore's the Tribune?
There.
Whence come ye, good Petillius?
From the General.
With what, for heavens sake?
With good counsel, Drusus,
and love, to comfort him.
Good Regulus
step to the soldier, and allay his anger;
for he is wilde as winter.
O, are ye there? have at ye. Sure he 's dead,
it cannot be he dare out live this fortune:
he must die, 't is most necessary; men expect it;
and thought of life in him, goes beyond coward.
Forsake the field so basely? fie upon 't:
so poorly to betray his worth? so coldly
to cut all credit from the soldier? sure
if this man mean to live, as I should think it
beyond belief, he must retire where never
the name of Rome, the voice of Arms, or Honour
was known or heard of yet: he 's certain dead,
or strongly means it; he 's no Soldier else,
no Roman in him; all he has done, but outside,
fought either drunk or desperate. Now he rises.
How does Lord Penyus?
As ye see.
I am glad on 't;
continue so still. The Lord General,
the valiant General, great Swetonius—
No more of me is spoken; my name's perished.
He that commanded fortune and the day
by his own valour and discretion,
when, as some say, Penyus refused to come,
but I believe 'em not, sent me to see ye.
Ye are welcome; and pray see me; see me well,
ye shall not see me long.
I hope so, Penyus;
the gods defend, Sir.
See me, and understand me: This is he
lef• to fill up your triumph; he that basely
whistled his honour off to the wind; that coldly
shrunk in his politic head, when Rome like reapers
sweat blood, and spirit, for a glorious harvest,
and bound it up, and brought it off: that fool,
that having gold and cupper offered him,
refused the wealth, and took the waste: that soldier
that being courted by loud fame and fortune,
labour in one hand, that propounds us gods,
and in the other, glory that creats us,
yet durst doubt, and be damned.
It was an error.
A foul one, and a black one.
Yet the blackest
may be washed white again.
Never.
Your leave, Sir,
and I beseech ye note me; for I love ye,
and bring along all comfort: Are we gods,
allied to no infirmities? are our natures
more then men's natures? when we slip a little
out of the way of virtue, are we lost?
is there no medicine called Sweet mercy?
None, Petillius;
there is no mercy in mankind can reach me,
nor is it fit it should; I have sinned beyond it.
Forgiveness meets with all faults.
'T is all faults,
all sins I can commit, to be forgiven:
't is loss of whole man in me, my discretion
to be so stupid, to arrive at pardon.
O but the General—
He's a brave Gentleman,
a valiant, and a loving; and I dare say
he would, as far as honour durst direct him,
make even with my fault: but 't is not honest,
nor in his power: examples that may nourish
neglect and disobedience in whole bodies,
and totter the estates and faiths of armies,
must not be plaid withal; nor out of pity
make a General forget his duty:
nor dare I hope more from him then is worthy.
What would ye do?
Die.
So would sullen children,
women that want their wills, slaves, disobedient,
that fear the law, die. Fie, great Captain; you
a man to rule men, to have thousand lives
under your regiment, and let your passion
betray your reason? I bring you all forgiveness,
the noblest kind commends, your place, your honour.
Prithee no more; 't is foolish: did not thou?
by — thou did, I over-heard thee, there,
there where thou standst now, deliver me for rascal,
poor, dead, cold coward, miserable, wretched,
if I outlived this ruin?
I?
And thou did it nobly,
like a true man, a soldier: and I thank thee,
I thank thee, good Petillius; thus I thank thee.
Since ye are so justly made up, let me tell ye
it is fit ye die indeed.
O how thou love me!
For say he had forgiven ye; say the peoples whispers
were tame again, the time run out for wonder,
what must your own Command think, from whose Swords
ye have taken off the edges, from whose valours
the due and recompense of Arms; nay, made it doubtful
whether they knew obedience? must not these kill ye?
Say they are won to pardon ye, by mere miracle
brought to forgive ye; what old valiant Soldier,
what man that loves to fight, and fight for Rome,
will ever follow you more? dare ye know these ventures?
if so, I bring ye comfort; dare ye take it?
No, no, Petillius, no.
If your mind serve ye,
ye may live still; but how? yet pardon me,
you may outwear all too; but when? and certain
there is a mercy for each fault, if tamely
a man will take 't upon conditions.
No, by no means: I am only thinking now, Sir,
(for I am resolved to go) of a most base death,
fitting the baseness of my fault. I'll hang,
Ye shall not; y' are a Gentleman I honour,
I would else flatter ye, and force ye live,
which is far baser. Hanging? 't is a dogs death,
an end for slaves.
The fitter for my baseness.
Besides, the man that 's hanged, preaches his end, and sits a sign for all the world to gape at.
That's true: I'll take a fitter poison.
No,
't is equal ill; the death of rats, and women,
lovers, and lazy boys, that fear correction.
Die like a man.
Why my sword then.
I, if your sword be sharp, Sir,
there 's nothing under heaven that 's like your sword;
your sword 's a death indeed.
It shall be sharp, Sir.
Why Mithridates was an arrant ass
to die by poison, if all Bosphorus
could lend him swords: your sword must do the deed:
't is shame to die choked, fame to die and bleed.
Thou hast: confirmed me: and, my good Petillius,
tell me no more I may live.
'T was my Commission;
but now I see ye in a nobler way,
a way to make all even.
Fare-well, Captain:
be a good man, and fight well: be obedient:
command thy self, and then thy men. Why shake thou?
I do not, Sir.
I would thou had, Petillius:
I would find something to forsake the world with
worthy the man that dies: a kind of earth-quake
thorough all stern valours but mine own.
I feel now
a kind of trembling in me.
Keep it still,
as thou love virtue, keep it.
And brave Captain,
the great and honoured Penyus.
That again:
O how it heightens me! again, Petillius.
Most excellent Commander.
Those were mine,
mine, only mine.
They are still.
Then to keep 'em
for ever falling more, have at ye, heavens,
ye everlasting powers, I am yours: The work's done,
that neither fire, nor age, nor melting envy
shall ever conquer. Carry my last words
to the great General: kiss his hands, and say,
My soul I give to heaven, my fault to justice
which I have done upon my self: my virtue,
if ever there was any in poor Penyus,
made more, and happier, light on him. I faint.
And where there is a foe, I wish him fortune.
I die: lie lightly on my ashes, gentle earth.
And on my sin. Fare-well, great Penyus,
the soldier is in fury. Now I am glad
't is done before he comes. This way, for me,
the way of toil; for thee, the way of honour. 
Kill him, kill him, kill him.
What will ye do?
Good soldiers, honest soldiers.
Kill him, kill him, kill him.
Kill us first; we command too.
Valiant Soldiers,
consider but whose life ye seek. O Drusus,
bid him be gone, he dies else. Shall Rome say
(ye most approved soldiers) her dear children
devoured the fathers of the fights? shall rage
and stubborn fury guide those swords to slaughter,
to slaughter of their own, to Civil ruin?
O let 'em in: all 's done, all 's ended, Regulus,
Penyus has found his last eclipse. Come, Soldiers,
come, and behold your miseries: come bravely,
full of your mutinous and bloody angers,
and here bestow your darts. O only Roman,
O father of the Wars.
Why stand ye stupid?
where be your killing furies? whose sword now
shall first be sheathed in Penyus? do ye weep?
Howl out, ye wretches, ye have cause: howl ever.
Who shall now lead ye fortunate? whose valour
preserve ye to the glory of your Country?
who shall march out before ye, coyed and courted
by all the mistresses of War, care, counsel,
quick-ey'd experience, and victory twined to him?
who shall beget ye deeds beyond inheritance
to speak your names, and keep your honours living,
when children fail, and time that takes all with him,
build houses for ye to oblivion?
O ye poor desperate fools: no more now, soldiers;
go home, and hang your arms up; let just rot'em;
and humble your stern valours to soft prayers;
for ye have sunk the frame of all your virtues;
the sun that warmed your bloods is set for ever:
I'll kiss thy honoured cheek. Fare well, great Penyus,
thou thunder-bolt, fare-well. Take up the body:
to morrow morning to the Camp convey it.
there to receive due Ceremonies. That eye
that blinds himself with weeping, gets most glory.
Bring up the Catapults and shake the wall,
we will not be out-brav'd thus.
Shake the earth,
ye cannot shake our souls. Bring up your Rams,
and with their armed heads, make the Fort totter,
ye do but rock us into death. 
See Sir,
see the Icenian Queen in all her glory
from the strong battlements proudly appearing,
as if she meant to give us lashes.
Yield, Queen.
I am unacquainted with that language, Roman.
Yield, honoured Lady, and expect our mercy,
we love thy nobleness.
I thank ye, ye say well;
but mercy and love are sins in Rome and hell.
Ye cannot scope our strength; ye must yield, Lady,
ye must adore and fear the power of Rome.
If Rome be earthly, why should any knee
with bending adoration worship her?
She's vicious; and your partial selves confess,
aspires the height of all impiety:
therefore it is fitter I should reverence
the thatched houses where the Britains dwell
in careless mirth, where the blessed household gods
see nought but chaste and simple purity.
It is not high power that makes a place divine,
nor that the men from gods derive their line.
But sacred thoughts in holy bosoms stored,
make people noble, and the place adored.
Beat the wall deeper.
Beat it to the center,
we will not sink one thought.
I'll make ye.
No.
O mother, these are fearful hours: speak gently
to these fierce men, they will afford ye pity.
Pity? thou fearful girl; it is for those wretches
that misery makes tame. Woulest thou live less?
Wast not thou born a Princess? Can my blood,
and thy brave fathers spirit, suffer in thee
so base a separation from thy self,
as mercy from these Tyrants? Thou love lust sure,
and long to prostitute thy youth and beauty
to common slaves for bread. Say th y had mercy;
the devil a relenting conscience:
the lives of Kings rest in their Diadems,
which to their bodies lively souls do give,
and ceasing to be Kings, they cease to live.
Show such another fear, and —
I'll fling thee to their fury.
He is dead then?
I think so certainly; yet all my means, Sir,
even to the hazard of my life —
No more:
wee must not seem to mourn here.
There's a breach made,
is it your will we charge, Sir?
Once more mercy,
mercy to all that yield.
I scorn to answer:
Speak to him girl; and hear thy sister.
General,
hear me, and mark me well, and look upon me
directly in my face, my women's face,
whose only beauty is the hate it bears ye;
see with thy narrowest eyes, thy sharpest wishes,
into my soul, and see what there inhabits;
see if one fear, one shadow of a terror,
one paleness dare appear but from my anger,
to lay hold on your mercies. No, ye fools,
poor Fortunes fools, we were not born for triumphs,
to follow your gay sports, and fill your slaves
with hoots and acclamations.
Brave behaviour.
The children of as great as Rome, as noble,
our names before her, and our deeds her envy;
must we gild ore your Conqu st, make your State,
that is not fairly strong, but fortunate?
No, no, ye Romans, we have ways to scope ye,
to make ye poor again, indeed our prisoners,
and stick our triumphs full.
's death, I shall love her.
To torture ye with suff•ring, like our slaves;
to make ye curse our patience, wish the world
were lost again, to win us only, and esteem
the end of all ambitions.
Do ye wonder?
we'll make our monuments in spite of fortune,
in spite of all your E gles wings: we'll work
a pitch above ye; and from our height we'll stoop
as fearless of your bloody fears; and fortunate,
as if we preyed on heartless doves.
Strange stiffness.
Decius, go charge the breach. 
Charge it home, Roman,
we shall deceive thee else. Where 's Nennius?
They have made a mighty breach.
Stick in thy body,
and make it good but half an hour.
I'll do it.
And then be sure to die.
It shall go hard else.
Fare well with all my heart; we shall meet yonder,
where few of these must come.
Gods take thee, Lady.
Bring up the swords, and poison.
O my fortune!
How, how, ye whore?
Good mother, nothing to offend ye.
Here, wench:
behold us, Romans.
Mercy yet.
No talking:
puff; there goes all your pity. Come, short prayers,
and let 's dispatch the business: you begin,
shrink not; I'll see ye do 't.
O gentle mother,
O Romans, O my heart; I dare not.
Woman, woman,
unnatural woman.
O persuade her, Romans:
alas, I am young, and would live. Noble mother,
can ye kill that ye gave life? are my years
fit for destruction?
Yield, and be a Queen still,
a mother, and a friend.
Ye talk: come, hold it,
and put it home.
Fie, sister, fie,
what would you live to be?
A whore still.
Mercy.
Hear her, thou wretched woman.
Mercy, mother:
O whither will you send me? I was once
your darling, your delight.
O gods,
fear in my family? do it, and nobly.
O do not frown then.
Do it, worthy sister:
't is nothing, 't is a pleasure; we'll go with ye.
O if I knew but whither.
To the blessed,
where we shall meet our father.
Woman.
Talk not.
Where nothing but true joy is.
That 's a good wench, mine own sweet girl; put it close to thee.
O comfort me still, for heavens sake.
Where eternal
our youths are, and our beauties; where no Wars come,
nor lustful slaves to ravish us.
That steels me:
a long farewell to this world.
Good: I'll help thee.
The next is mine.
Show me a Roman Lady in all your stories,
dare do this for her honour: they are cowards,
eat coals like compelled Cats: your great Saint Lucrece
died not for honour; Tarquin topped her well,
and mad she could not hold him, bled.
By—
I am in love: I would give an hundred pound now
but to lie with this women's behaviour. O the devil.
Ye shall see me example. All your Rome,
if I were proud, and loved ambition;
if I were lustful, all your ways of pleasure;
if I were greedy, all the wealth ye conquer—
Make haste.
I will. Could not entice to live
but two short hours this frailty: would ye learn
how to die bravely, Romans, to fling off
this case of flesh, lose all your cares for ever?
live as we have done, well, and fear the gods,
hunt Honour, and not Nations with your swords,
keep your minds humble, your devotions high;
so shall ye learn the noblest part, to die.
I come, wench; to ye all Fates hang-men; you
that case the aged destinies, and cut
the threads of Kingdoms, as they draw 'em: here,
here 's a draught would ask no less then Caesar
to pledge it for the glories sake.
Great Lady.
Make up your own conditions.
So we will.
Stay.
Stay.
Be any thing.
A Saint, Swetonius,
when thou shalt fear, and die like a slave. Ye fool,
ye should have ti'd up, death first, when ye conquered,
ye sweat for us in vain else: see him here,
he 's ours still, and our friend; laughs at your pities;
and we command him with as easy reins
as do our enemies. I feel the poison.
Poor vanquished Romans, with what matchless tortures
could I now rack ye? But I pity ye,
desiring to die quiet: nay, so much
I hate to prosecute my victory,
that I will give ye counsel ere I die.
If you will keep your Laws and Empire whole,
place in your Roman flesh a Britain soul.
Desperate and strange.
'T is won, Sir, and the Britains
all put to the sword.
Give her fair Funeral;
she was truly noble, and a Queen.
—take it,
a love-mange grown upon me? what, a spirit?
I am glad of this, I have found ye.
In my belly,
O how it tumbles?
Ye good gods, I thank ye. 
Thus we afflicted Britains climb for safeties,
and to avoid our dangers, seek destructions;
thus we awake to sorrows. O thou woman,
thou agent for adversities, what curses
this day belong to thy improvidence?
to Brittany by thy means, what sad millions
of widows weeping eyes? The strong mans valour
thou hast betrayed to fury; the childes fortune
to fear, and want of friends: whose pieties
might wipe his mornings off, and build his sorrows
a house of rest by his blessed ancestor:
the virgins thou hast robed of all their wishes,
blasted their blowing hopes, turned their songs,
their mirthful Marriage songs to Funerals,
the Land thou hast left a wilderness of wretches.
The boy begins to stir: thy safety made,
would my soul were in heaven.
O noble Uncle,
look out; I dreamed we were betrayed.
No harm, boy;
't is but thy emptiness that breeds these fancies;
thou shalt have meat anon.
A little, Uncle,
and I shall hold out bravely. What are those?
look, Uncle, look, those multiutdes that march there?
they come upon us stealing by.
I see 'em;
and prithee be not fearful.
Now ye hate me,
would I were dead.
Thou know I love thee dearly.
Did I ere shrink yet, Uncle? were I a man now,
I should be angry with ye.
My sweet chicken,
see, they have reached us, and as it seems they bear
some Soldiers body, by their solemn gestures,
and sad solemnities; it well appears too
to be of eminence. Most worthy Soldiers,
let me entreat your knowledge to inform me
what noble body that is which you bear
with such a sad and ceremonious grief,
as if ye meant to woo the world and nature
to be in love with death? Most honourable
excellent Romans, by your ancient valours,
as ye love fame, resolve me.
'T is the body
of the great Captain Penyus, by himself
made cold and spiritless.
O stay, ye Romans,
by the religion which you owe those gods
that lead ye on to Victories, by those glories
which made even pride a virtue in ye.
Stay:
what 's thy will, Caratach?
Set down the body,
the body of the noblest of all Romans,
as ye expect an offering at your graves
from your friends sorrows, set it down a while,
that with your griefs an enemy may mingle;
a noble enemy that loves a Soldier;
and lend a tear to virtue: even your foes,
your wild foes, as you called us, are yet stored
with fair affections, our hearts fresh, our spirits,
though sometimes stubborn, yet when virtue dies,
soft and relenting as a virgins prayers.
O set it down.
Set down the body, soldiers.
Thou hallowed relic, thou rich diamond
cut with thine own dust; thou for whose wide fame
the world appears too narrow, mans all thoughts,
had they all tongues, too silent; thus I bow
to thy most honoured ashes; though an enemy,
yet friend to all thy words: sleep peaceably;
happiness crown thy soul, and in thy earth
some Laurel fix his seat, there grow, and flourish,
and make thy grave an everlasting triumph.
Fare well all glorious Wars, now thou art gone,
and honest Arms adieu: all noble Battles
maintained in thirst of honour, not of blood,
fare well for ever.
Was this Roman, Uncle,
so good a man?
Thou never knew thy father.
He died before I was born.
This worthy Roman
was such another piece of endless honour,
such a brave soul dwelt in him: their proportions
and faces were not much unlike, boy: excellent natures,
see how it works into his eyes, mine own boy.
The multitudes of these men, and their fortunes,
could never make me fear yet: one mans goodness—
O now thou please me: weep still, my child,
as if thou saw me dead; with such a flux
or flood of sorrow: still thou please me.
And worthy soldiers, pray receive these pledges,
these hatchments of our griefs, and grace us so much
to place 'em on his Hearse. Now if ye please,
bear off the noble burden; raise his pile
high as Olympus, making heaven to wonder
to see a star upon earth outshining theirs.
And ever loved, ever living be
thy honoured and most sacred memory.
Thou hast done honestly, good Caratach,
•nd when thou di•st, a thousand virtuous Romans
shall sing thy soul to heaven. Now march on, soldiers.
Now dry thine eyes, my boy.
Are they all gone?
I could have wept this hour yet.
Come, take cheer,
and raise thy spirit, child: if but this day
thou can bear out thy faintness, the night coming
I'll fashion our escape.
Pray fear not me;
indeed I am very hearty.
Be so still;
his mischiefs lessen, that controls his ill.
What do I ail, in the name of heaven? I did but see her,
and see her die: she stinks by this time strongly,
abominably stinks: she was a woman,
a thing I never cared for: but to die so,
so confidently, bravely, strongly; O the devil,
I have the bots, by—; she scorned us, strangely,
all we could do, or durst do; threatened us
with such a noble anger, and so governed
with such a fiery spirit—; the plain bots;
a—upon the bots, the love-bots: hang me,
hang me even out of the way, directly hang me.
O penny pipers, and most painful penners
of bountiful new ballads, what a subject,
what a sweet subject for your silver sounds,
is crept upon ye?
Here he is; have at him. 
She set the sword unto her breast,
great pity it was to see,
That three drops of her life-warm blood,
run trickling down her knee.
Art thou there, bonny boy? and in faith how dost thou?
Well, gramercy, how dost thou? h' as found me,
scented me out: the shame the devil owed me,
h' as kept his day with. And what news, Junius?
It was an old tale ten thousand times told,
of a young Lady was turned into mold,
her life was lovely, her death it was bold.
A cruel rogue; now h' as drawn pursue on me,
he hunts me like a devil. No more singing;
thou hast got a cold: come, let's go drink some Sack, boy.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Why dost thou laugh?
what Mares nest hast thou found?
Ha, ha, ha.
I cannot laugh alone: Decius, Demetrius,
Curius: O my sides. Ha, ha, ha, ha,
the strangest jest.
Prithee no more.
The admirablest fooling.
Thou art the prettiest fellow.
Sirs.
Why Junius,
prithee away, sweet Junius.
Let me sing then.
Whoa, here's a stir now: sing a song of six pence, by—(if) prithee; — on 't: Junius.
I must either sing, or laugh.
And what 's your reason?
What 's that to you?
And I must whistle.
Do so.
O, I hear 'em coming.
I have a little business.
Thou shalt not go, believe it: what a Gentleman of thy sweet conversation?
Captain Junius,
sweet Captain, let me go with all celerity;
things are not always one: and do not question,
nor jeer, nor gybe: none of your doleful ditties,
nor your sweet conversation: you will find then
I may be angered.
By no means, Petillius;
anger a man that never knew passion?
it is most impossible: a noble Captain,
a wise and generous Gentleman?
Tom puppy,
leave this way to abuse me: I have found ye,
but for your mothers sake I will forgive ye.
Your subtle understanding may discover
(as you think) some trim toy to make you merry;
some straw to tickle ye; but do not trust to 't;
y' are a young man, and may do well; be sober;
carry your self discreetly.
Yes forsooth.
How does the brave Petillius?
Monstrous merry:
we two were talking what a kind of thing
I was when I was in love; what a strange monster
for little boys and girls to wonder at;
how like a fool I looked.
So they do all,
like great dull slavering fools.
Petillius saw too.
No more of this; it is scurvy: peace.
How nastily,
indeed how beastly all I did became me?
how I forgot to blow my nose? there he stands,
an honest and a wise man; if himself
(I dare avouch it boldly, for I know it)
should find himself in love—
I am angry.
Surely his wise self would hang his beastly self,
his understanding self so maul his asse-self—
He's bound to do it; for he knows the follies,
the poverties, and baseness that belongs to 't,
h' as read upon the reformations long.
He has so.
'T is true, and he must do 't:
nor is it fit indeed any such coward—
You'll leave prating.
Should dare come near the Regiments, specially
those curious puppies (for believe there are such)
that only love behaviours: those are dog-whelps,
dwindle away, because a woman dies well;
commit with passions only: fornicate
with the free spirit merely: you, Petillius,
for you have long observed the world.
Dost thou hear?
I'll beat thee damnably within these three hours:
go pray; may be I'll kill thee. Farewell, Jack daws. 
What a strange thing he's grown?
I am glad he is so:
and stranger he shall be, before I leave him.
Is 't possible her mere death—▪
I observed him,
and found him taken, infinitely taken
with her bravery: I have followed him,
and seen him kiss his sword since, court his scabbard,
call dying, dainty deer; her brave mind, mistress;
casting a thousand ways, to give those forms,
that he might lie with 'em, and get old Armours:
he had got me of the hip once: it shall go hard, friends,
but he shall find his own coin.
How now Miser?
is Judas yet come in? 
Yes, and has lost
most of his men too. Here he is.
What news?
I have lodged him; rouse him he that dares.
Where, Judas?
On a steep rock, in the woods, the boy too with him,
and there he swears he will keep his Christmas, Gentlemen,
but he will come away with full conditions,
bravely, and like a Britain: he paid part of us,
yet I think we fought bravely: for mine own part,
I was four several times at half sword with him,
twice stood his partisan: but the plain truth is,
he's a mere devil, and no man: in the end he swinged us,
and swinged us soundly too: he fights by With-craft:
yet for all that I see him lodged,
Take more men,
and scout him round. Miser, march you along.
What victuals has he?
Not a piece of Biscuit,
not so much as will stop a tooth; nor water,
more then they make themselves: they lie
just like a brace of bear-whelps, close, and crafty,
sucking their fingers for their food.
Cut off then
all hope of that way: take sufficient forces.
But use no foul play, on your lives: that man
that does him mischief by deceit, I'll kill him.
He shall have fair play, he deserves it.
Hark ye,
what should I do there then? you are brave Captains,
most valiant men; go up your selves; use virtue,
see what will come on 't: pray the Gentleman
to come down, and be taken. Ye all know him,
I think ye have felt him too: there ye shall find him,
his sword by his side, plums of a pound weight by him
will make your chops ache: you'll find it a more labour
to win him living, then climbing of a Crows nest.
Away, and compass him; we shall come up
I am sure within these two hours. Watch him close.
He shall flee thorough the air, if he escape us.
What's this loud lamentation?
The dead body
of the great Penyus is new come to the Camp Sir.
Dead!
By himself, they say.
I feared that fortune.
Peace guide him up to heaven.
Away good Miser. 
If thou be guilty,
some sullen plague thou hat'st most light upon thee:
the Regiment return on Junius,
hee well deserves it.
So.
Draw out three Companies,
yours Decius, Junius, and thou Petillius,
and make up instantly to Caratach,
he's in the wood before ye; we shall follow
after due ceremony done to the dead,
the noble dead: Come, let's go burn the body.
The Regiment given from me; disgraced openly;
in love too with a trifle to abuse me?
A merry world, a fine world: served seven years
to be an ass of both sides, sweet Petillius,
you have brought your hogs to a fine market: you are wise, Sir,
your honourable brain-pan full of crotchets,
an understanding Gentleman; your projects
cast with assurance ever: would not thou now
be banged about the pate, Petillius?
answer to that sweet soldier; surely, surely,
I think ye would; pulled by the nose, kicked; hang thee,
thou art the arrant'st rascal: trust thy wisdom
with any thing of weight; the wind with feathers.
Out ye blind puppy; you command? you govern?
dig for a great a day, or serve a swine-herd;
too noble for thy nature too. I must up;
but what I shall do there, let time discover. 
Hang it of the side of the rock, as though the Britains
stole hither to relieve him; who first ventures
to fetch it off, is ours. I cannot see him.
He lies close in a hole above, I know it,
gnawing upon his anger: ha? no, it is not he,
It is but the shaking of the boughs.
— shake 'em,
I am sure they shake me soundly. There.
It is nothing.
Make no noise: if he stir, a deadly tempest
of huge stones fall upon us: it is done: away close. 
Sleep still, sleep sweetly child, it is all thou feedst on.
No gentle Britain near; no valiant charity
to bring thee food? poor knave, thou art sick, extreme sick,
almost grown wild for meat; and yet thy goodness
will not confess, nor show it. All the woods
are double lined with soldiers; no way left us
to make a noble scope: I'll sit down by thee,
and when thou wake, either get meat to save thee,
or lose my life in the purchase. Good gods comfort thee.
Ye are not far off now, Sir.
Draw the Companies
the closest way thorough the woods; we'll keep on this way.
I will Sir: half a furlong more you'll come
within the sight of the Rock; keep on the left side,
you'll be discovered else: I'll lodge your Companies
in the wilde vines beyond ye.
Do ye mark him?
Yes, and am sorry for him.
Junius,
pray let me speak two words with you.
Walk before,
I'll overtake ye straight.
I will. 
Now, Captain.
You have oft told me, you have loved me, Junius.
Most sure I told you truth then.
And that love
should not deny me any honest thing.
It shall not.
Dare ye swear it?
I have forgot all passages between us
that have been ill, forgiven too, forgot you.
What would this man have? By— I do, Sir, so it be fit to grant ye.
It is most honest.
Why, then I'll do it.
Kill me.
How?
Pray kill me.
Kill ye?
I, kill me quickly, suddenly,
now kill me.
On what reason? ye amaze me.
If ye do love me, kill me, ask me not why:
I would be killed, and by you.
Mercy on me,
What ails this man? Petillius.
Pray ye dispatch me,
ye are not safe whilst I live: I am dangerous,
troubled extremely, even to mischief, Junius,
an enemy to all good men: fear not, it is justice;
I shall kill you else.
Tell me but the cause,
and I will do it.
I am disgraced, my service
slighted, and unrewarded by the General,
my hopes left wilde and naked; besides these,
I am grown ridiculous, an ass, a folly
I dare not trust my self with: Prithee kill me.
All these may be redeemed as easily
as you would heal your finger.
Nay —
Stay, I'll do it,
you shall not need your anger: But first, Petillius,
you shall unarm your self; I dare not trust
a man so bent to mischief.
There's my sword;
and do it handsomely.
yes, I will kill ye,
believe that certain: but first i'll lay before ye
the most extreme fool ye have plaid in this,
the honour purposed for ye, the great honour
the General intended ye,
How?
And then I'll kill ye,
because ye shall die miserable. Know Sir,
the Regiment was given me, but till time
called ye to do some worthy deed might stop
the peoples ill thoughts of ye for Lord Penyus,
I mean his death. How soon this time's come to ye,
and hasted by Swetonius? Go, says he,
Junius and Decius, and go thou Petillius;
distinctly, thou Petillius, and draw up,
to take stout Caratach: there's the deed purposed,
a deed to take off all faults, of all natures:
And thou Petillius; Mark it, there's the honour,
and that done, all made even.
Stay.
No, I'll kill ye.
He knew thee absolute, and full in soldier,
daring beyond all dangers, found thee out
according to the boldness of thy spirit,
a subject, such a subject.
Hark ye Junius,
I will live now.
By no means. Wooed thy worth,
held thee by the chin up, as thou sankst, and showed thee
how honour held her arms out: Come, make ready,
since ye will die an ass.
Thou wilt not kill me.
By— but I will Sir: I'll have no man dan∣gerous
live to destroy me afterword. Besides, you have gotten
honour enough, let young men rise now. Nay,
I do perceive too by the General, (which is
one main cause ye shall die) how ere he carry it,
such a strong doting on ye, that I fear,
you shall command in chief: how are we paid then?
Come, if you will pray, dispatch it.
Is there no way?
Not any way to live.
I will do any thing,
redeem my self at any price: good Junius,
let me but die upon the Rock, but offer
my life up like a Soldier.
You will seek then
to out-doe every man.
Believe it Junius,
you shall go stroke by stroke with me.
You'll leave off too,
as you are noble, and a soldier,
for ever these mad fancies.
Dare ye trust me?
By all that's good and honest.
There's your sword then,
and now come on a new man: Virtue guide thee. 
Courage my Boy, I have found meat: look Hengo,
look where some blessed Britain, to preserve thee,
has hung a li•tle food and drink: cheer up Boy,
do not forsake me now.
O Uncle, Uncle,
I feel I cannot stay long: yet I'll fetch it,
to keep your noble life: Uncle, I am heart whole,
and would live.
Thou shalt, long I hope.
But my head, Uncle:
me thinks the Rock goes round. 
Mark 'em well, Judas.
Peace, as you love your life.
Do not you hear
the noise of bells?
of bells Boy? it is thy fancy,
alas, thy bodie's full of wind.
me thinks Sir,
they ring a strange sad knell, a preparation
to some near funeral of State: nay, weep not,
mine own sweet Uncle, you will kill me sooner.
O my poor chicken.
Fie, faint-hearted Uncle:
Come, tie me in your belt, and let me down.
I'll go my self, Boy.
No, as ye love me, Uncle;
I will not eat it, if I doe not fetch it;
the danger only I desire: pray tie me.
I will, and all my care hang ore thee: come child,
my valiant-child.
Let me down apace, Uncle,
and ye shall see how like a Daw I'll whip it
from all their policies: for it is most certain
a Roman train: and ye must hold me sure too,
you'll spoil all else. When I have brought it Uncle,
we'll be as merry —
Go in the name of heaven Boy.
Quick, quick, Uncle, I have it. Oh.
What ail thou?
O my best Uncle, I am slain.
I see ye, and heaven direct my hand: destruction
go with thy coward soul. How dost thou Boy?
Oh villain, pocky villain.
O Uncle, Uncle,
oh how it pricks me: am I preserved for this?
extremely pricks me.
Coward, rascal Coward,
dogs eat thy flesh.
Oh I bleed hard: I faint too, out upon 't,
how sick I am? the lean Rogue, Uncle.
Look Boy,
I have laid him sure enough.
Have ye knocked his brains out?
I warrant thee for stirring more: cheer up, child.
Hold my sides hard, stop, stop, oh wretched fortune,
must we part thus? Still I grow sicker, Uncle.
Heaven look upon this noble child.
I once hoped
I should have lived to have met these bloody Romans
at my swords point, to have revenged my father,
to have beaten 'em: oh hold me hard. But Uncle—
Thou shalt live still I hope Boy. Shall I draw it?
Ye draw away my soul then. I would live
a little longer; spare me heavens, but only
to thank you for your tender love. Good Uncle,
good noble Uncle weep not.
Oh my chicken,
my deer Boy, what shall I lose?
Why, a child,
that must have died how-ever: had this escaped me,
fever or famine: I was born to die, Sir.
But thus unblown, my Boy?
I go the straighter
my journey to the gods: Sure I shall know ye
when ye come, Uncle.
Yes, Boy.
And I hope
wee shall enjoy together that great blessedness
you told me of.
Most certain, child.
I grow cold,
mine eyes are going.
Lift 'em up.
Pray for me;
and noble Uncle, when my bones are ashes,
think of your little Nephew. Mercy.
Mercy.
You blessed angels take him.
Kiss me: so.
Farewell, farewell. 
Farewell the hopes of Britain,
thou Royal graft, Farewell for ever. Time and Death,
ye have done your worst. Fortune now see, now proudly
pluck off thy vail, and view thy triumph: Look,
look what thou hast brought this Land to. Oh fair flower,
how lovely yet thy ruins show, how sweetly
even death embraces thee! The peace of heaven,
the fellowship of all great souls be with thee.
Ho? dare ye Romans? ye shall win me bravely.
Thou art mine. 
Not yet, Sir.
Breathe ye, ye poor Romans,
and come up all, with all your ancient valours,
like a rough wind I'll shake your souls, and send 'em—
Yield thee bold Caratach; by all —
as I am soldier, as I envy thee,
I'll use thee like thy self, the valiant Britain.
Brave soldier yield; thou stock of Arms and Honour,
thou filler of the world with fame and glory.
Most worthy man, we will woo thee, be thy prisoners.
Excellent Britain, do me but that honour,
that more to me then Conquests, that true happiness,
to be my friend.
O Romans, see what here is:
had this Boy lived —
For Fems sake, for thy Swords sake,
as thou desire to build thy virtues greater:
by all that's excellent in man, and honest —
I do believe: Ye have had me a brave foe;
make me a noble friend, and from your goodness,
give this Boy honourable earth to lie in.
He shall have fitting Funeral.
I yield then,
not to your blows, but your brave courtesies.
Thus we conduct then to the arms of Peace
the wonder of the world.
Thus I embrace thee, 
and let it be no flattery that I tell thee,
thou art the only Soldier.
How to thank ye
I must hereafter find upon your usage.
I am for Rome?
Ye must.
Then Rome shall know
the man that makes her spring of glory grow.
Petillius, you have shown much worth this day,
redeemed much error,
ye have my love again, preserve it. Junius,
with you I make him equal in the Regiment.
The elder and the nobler: I'll give place, Sir.
Ye show a friends soul.
March on, and through the Camp in every tongue.
the Virtues of great Caratach be sung. 

