ROund, round, perfume it round, quick, look ye
Diligently the state be right, are these the richest
Cushions? Fie, fie, who waits in the wardrobe?
But pray tell me, do you think for certain
These Ambassadors shall have this morning audience?
They shall have it: Lord that you live at Court
And understand not? I tell you they must have it.
Upon what necessity?
Still you are of the trick of Court, sell your place
And sow your grounds, you are not for this tillage.
Madams, the best way is the upper lodgings,
There you may see at ease.
We thank you sir. 
Would you have al these slighted? who should report then
The Ambassadors were handsome men? his beard
A neat one? the fire of his eyes quicker then lightning,
And when it breaks, as blasting? his legs, though little ones,
Yet movers of a mass of understanding?
Who shall commend their clothes: who shall take notice
Of the most wise behaviour of their feathers?
Ye live a raw man here.
I think I doe so.
Why, whether would you all press?
Good Master Usher.
My wife, and some few of my honest neighbours, here.
Prithee begone thou and thy honest neighbours,
Thou look like an ass, why, whether would you fish face
If I might have
But the honour to see you at my poor house sir,
A Capon bridled, and saddled I'll assure your worship,
A shoulder of mutton, and a pottle of wine sir;
I know your brother, he was as like ye,
And shot the best at buts—
A—upon thee.
Some music I'll assure you too,
My toy sir, can play of the virginals.
Prithee good toy,
Take away thy shoulder of mutton, it is fly blown,
And shoulder take thy flap along, here's no place for ye;
Nay then you had best be knocked. 
I would fine see him
The glory of this place, makes me remember,
But dye those thoughts, dye all but my desires,
Even those to death are sick too; he's not here,
Nor how my eyes may guide me—
What's your business?
Who keeps the outward door there? here's fine shuffling,
You wastcoater you must go back.
There is not,
There cannot be, six days and never see me?
There must not be desire; sit do you think
That if you had a Mistress—
Death, she is mad.
And were your self an honest man? it cannot—
What a devil hast thou to do with me or my honesty?
Will you be jogging, good nimble tongue,
My fellow door keeper.
Prithee let her alone.
The King is coming,
And shall we have an agent from the suburbs
Come to crave audience too?
Before I thought ye
To have a little breeding, some tang of Gentry;
But now I take ye plainly,
Without the help of any perspective,
For that ye cannot alter.
What's that?
An ass sir, you bray as like one,
And by my troth, me thinks as ye stand now,
Considering who to kick next, you appear to me
Just with that kind of gravity, and wisdom;
Your place may bear the name of Gentleman,
But if ever any of that butter stick to your bread—
You must be modester.
Let him use me nobler,
And wear good clothes to do good offices;
They hang upon a fellow of his virtue,
As though they hung on Gibbets.
A perilous wench.
Thrust her into a corner, I'll no more on her.
You have enough, go pretty maid, stand close,
And use that little tongue, with a little more temper.
I thank ye sir.
When the shows are past,
I'll have ye into the cellar, there we'll dine
A very pretty wench, a witty rogue,
And there we'll be as merry, can ye be merry?
O very merry.
Only our selves; this churlish fellow shall not know.
By no means.
And can you love a little?
Love exceedingly:
I have cause to love you dear sir.
Then I'll carry ye,
And show you all the pictures, and the hangings,
The lodgings, gardens, and the walks: and then (sweet)
You shall tell me where you lye.
Yes marry will I.
And't shall go hard but I'll send ye a venison pa∣sty,
And bring a bottle of wine along.
Make room there.
Room there before, stand close, the train is coming
Have I yet left a beauty to Catch fools?
Yet, yet, I see him not, O what a misery
Is love, expected long, deluded longer!
Conduct in the Ambassadors.
Make room there.
They shall not wait long answer — 
Yet he comes not.
Why are eyes set on these, and multitudes
Follow to make these wonders? O good gods!
What would these look like if my love were here?
But I am fond, forgetful.
Now your grievance,
Speak short, and have as short dispatch.
Then thus sir:
In all our Royal Masters names, We tell you
Ye have done injustice, broke the bonds of concord,
And from their equal shares, from Alexander
Parted, and so possessed, not like a brother,
But as an open Enemy, Ye have hedged in
Whole Provinces, manned and maintained these injuries;
And daily with your sword (though they still honour ye)
Make bloody roads, take Towns, and ruin Castles,
And still their sufferance feels the weight.
Think of that love great sir, that honoured friend∣ship
Your self hold with our Masters, think of that strength
When you were all one body, all one mind;
When all your swords struck one way, when your angers,
Like so many brother billows rose together,
And curling up your foaming crests, defied
Even mighty Kings, and in their false, entombed 'em;
O think of these; and you that have been Conquerors,
That ever led your fortunes open eyed,
Chained fast by confidence; you that fame courted,
Now ye want enemies and men to match ye;
Let not your own swords seek your ends to shame ye.
Choose which you will, or peace or war,
We come prepared for either.
Room for the Prince there.
was it the Prince they said? how my heart trem∣bled!
It is he indeed; what a sweet noble fierceness
Dwells in his eyes? young Meleager like,
When he returned from slaughter of the Boar,
Crowned with the loves and honours of the people,
With all the gallant youth of Greece, he looks now,
Who could deny him love?
Hail Royal Father.
Ye are welcome from your sport sir, do you see this, gent.
You that bring thunders in your mouths, and earthquakes
To shake and totter my designs? can you imagine
(You men of poor and common apprehensions)
Whilst I admit this man, my son, this nature
That in one look carries more fire, and fierceness,
Then all your masters in their lives: dare I admit him,
Admit him thus, even to my side, My bosom,
When he is fit to rule, when all men cry him,
And all hopes hang about his head; thus place him,
His weapon hatched in blood, all these attending
When he shall make their fortunes, all as sudden
In any expedition he shall point 'em,
As arrows from a Tartars bow, and speeding,
Dare I do this, and fear an enemy?
Fear your great Master? yours? or yours?
O Hercules,
Who says you do sir? Is there any thing
In these men's faces, or their Masters actions,
Able to work such wonders?
Now he speaks:
O I could dwell upon that tongue for ever.
You call 'em Kings, they never wore those roialties
Nor in the progress of their lives arrived yet
At any thought of King: imperial dignities,
And powerful god-like actions, fit for Princes
They can no more put on, and make 'em sit right,
Then I can with this mortal hand hold heaven:
Poor petty men, nor have I yet forgot
The chiefest honours time, and merit gave 'em:
Lysimachus your Master, at his best,
His highest, and his hopeful dignities
Was but grand-master of the Elephants;
Seleucus of the Treasure; and for Ptolomy,
A thing not thought on then, scarce heard of yet,
Some master of ammunition: and must these men—
What a brave confidence flows from his spirit?
O sweet young man!
Must these hold pace with us,
And on the same field hang their memories?
Must these examine what the wills of Kings are?
Prescribe to their designs, and chain their actions
To their restraints? be friends, and foes when they please?
Send out their thunders, and their menaces,
As if the fate of mortal thing were theirs?
Go home good men, and tell your masters from us,
We do 'em too much honour to force from 'em
Their barren countries, ruin their vast Cities,
And tell 'em out of love, we mean to leave 'em
(Since they will needs be Kings) no more to tread on,
Then they have able wits, and powers to manage,
And so we shall befriend 'em: ha? what does she there?
This is your answer King.
It is like to prove so.
Fie sweet, what make you here?
Pray ye do not chide me.
You do your self much wrong, and me.
Pray you pardon me,
I feel my fault, which only was committed
Through my dear love to you: I have not seen ye,
And how can I live then? I have not spoke to ye—
I know this week ye have not; I will redeem all.
You are so tender now: think where you are, sweet.
What other light have I left?
Prithee Celia,
Indeed, I'll see ye presently.
I have done sir:
You will not miss?
By this, and this, I will not.
It is in your will: and I must be obedient.
No more of these assemblies.
I am commanded.
Room for the Lady there: Madam, my service—
My Coach and't please you Lady.
Room before there.
The honour Madam, but to waite upon you—
My servants, and my state:
Lord, how they flock now?
Before I was afraid they would have beat me;
How these flies play in the Sunshine? pray ye no services,
Or if ye needs must play the hobby horses,
Seek out some beauty that affects 'em: farewell,
Nay pray ye spare: Gentlemen I am old enough
To go alone at these years, without crutches. 
Well, I could curse now: but that will not help me,
I made as sure account of this wench now, immediately,
Do but consider how the devil has crossed me,
Meat for my Master she cries, well —
Once more sir,
We ask your resolutions: peace or war yet?
War, war, my noble father.
Thus I fling it:
And fair eyed peace, farewell.
You have your answer;
Conduct out the Ambassadors, and give 'em convoys.
Tell your high hearted Masters, they shall not seek us,
Nor cool in the field in expectation of us,
We'll ease your men those marches: In their strengths,
And full abilities of mind and courage,
We'll ffnd 'em out, and at their best trim buckle with 'em
You will find so hot a Soldiers welcome sir,
Your favour shall not freeze,
A forward Gentleman,
Pity the wars should bruise such hopes—
Conduct 'em — 
Now, For this preparation: whore's Leontius?
Call him in presently: for I mean in person Gentlemen
My self, with my old fortune—
Royal sir:
Thus low I beg this honour: fame already
Hath every where raised trophies to your glory,
And conquest now grown old, and weak with following
The weary marches, and the bloody shocks
You daily set her in: it is now scarce honour
Foe you that never knew to fight, but conquer,
To sparkle such poor people: the royal Eagle
When she hath tried her young ones against the Sun,
And found 'em right; next teaches 'em to prey,
How to command on wing, and check below her
Even birds of noble plume; I am your own sir,
You have found my spirit, try it now, and teach it,
To stoop whole kingdoms: leave a little for me;
Let not your glory be so greedy sir,
To eat up all my hopes; you gave me life,
If to that life you add not what's more lasting,
A noble name, for man you have made a shadow:
Bless me this day: bid me go on, and lead,
Bid me go on, no less feared, then Antigonus,
And to my maiden sword, tie fast your fortune;
I know twill fight it self then: dear sir honour me:
Never fair virgin longed so.
Rise, and command then,
And be as fortunate as I expect ye:
I love that noble will; your young companions
Bred up and fostered with ye, I hope Demetrius. 
You will make soldiers too: they must not leave ye.
Never till life leave us sir.
O Leontius,
Here's work for you in hand.
I am even right glad sir.
For by my troth, I am now grown old with idleness;
I hear we shall abroad sir.
Yes, and presently,
But who thinks you commands now?
Who commands sir?
Methinkes mine eye should guide me: can there be
(If you your self will spare him so much honour)
Any found out to lead before your armies,
So full of faith, and fire as brave Demetrius?
King Philips Son, at his years was an old Soldier,
It is time his fortune be a wing, high time sir,
So many idle hours, as here he loiters,
So many ever-living names he loses,
I hope it is he.
It is he indeed, and nobly
He shall set forward: draw you all those Garrisons
Upon the frontiers as you pass: to those
Join these in pay at home, our ancient soldiers,
And as you go press all the Provinces.
We shall not need;
Believe, this hopeful Gentleman
Can want no swords, nor honest hearts to follow him,
We shall be full, no fear sir.
You Leontius,
Because you are an old, and faithful servant,
And know the wars, with all his vantages,
Be near to his instructions, least his youth
Lose valours best companion, staid discretion,
Show where to lead, to lodge, to charge with safety;
In execution not to break, nor scatter,
But with a provident anger, follow nobly:
Not covetous of blood, and death, but honour,
Be ever near his watches; cheer his labours,
And where his hope stands fair, provoke his valour;
Love him, and think it no dishonour (my Demetrius)
To wear this Jewel near thee; he is a tried one,
And one that even in spite of time, that sunk him,
And frosted up his strength, will yet stand by thee.
And with the proudest of thine enemies
Exchange for blood, and bravely: take his counsel.
Your grace hath made me young again, and wanton.
She must be known and suddenly; when you have done
Come in and take your leave sir, and some few
Prayers along.
Do ye know her?
Char. No, believe sir.
Did you observe her Tymon?
I looked on her,
But what she is —
I must have that found.
Well sir.
I know my duty, 
You shall be half my father.
All your Servant:
Come Gentlemen, you are resolved I am sure
To see these wars.
We dare not leave his fortunes,
Though most assured death hung round about us.
That bargains yet to make;
Be not too hasty, when ye face the Enemy,
Nor too ambitious to get honour instantly,
But charge within your bounds, and keep close bodies,
And you shall see what sport we'll make these mad-caps;
You shall have game enough, I warrant ye,
Every mans Cock shall fight.
I must go see sir:
Brave sir, as soon as I have taken leave,
I'll meet you in the Parck;
Draw the men thither,
Waite you upon Leontius.
We'll attend sir.
But I beseech your Grace, with speed; the sooner
We are in the field—
You could not please me better. 
You never saw the wars yet?
Not yet Colonel.
These foolish Mistresses do so hang about ye,
So whimper, and so hug, I know it Gentlemen,
And so entice ye, now ye are in the bud;
And that sweet tilting war, with eyes and kisses,
The alarms of soft vows, and sighs, and fiddle fiddles,
Spoils all our trade: You must forget these knick knacks,
A woman at some time of year, I grant ye
She is necessary; but make no business of her;
How now Lieutenant?
Oh sir, as ill as eves;
We shall have wars they say; they are mustering yonder:
Would we were at it once: fie, how it plagues me.
Here's one has served now under Captain Cupped,
And cracked a Pike in's youth: you see whats come on it.
No, my disease will never prove so honourable.
Why sure, thou hast the best pox.
If I have'em,
I am sure I got 'em in the best company;
They are pox of thirty Coats.
Thou hast mewed 'em finely:
Here's a strange fellow now, and a brave fellow,
If we may say so of a pocky fellow,
(Which I believe we may) this poor Lieutenant;
Whether he have the scratches, or the scabs,
Or what a devil it be, I'll say this for him,
There sights no braver soldier under Sun, gentlemen;
Show him an Enemy, his paine's forgot straight;
And where other men, by beds and bathes have ease,
And easy rules of physic, set him in a danger,
A danger, thats a fearful one indeed,
Ye rock him, and he will so play about ye,
Let it be ten to one, he ne'er comes off again;
Ye have his heart: and then he works it bravely,
And thoroughly bravely: not a pang remembered:
I have seen him do such things, belief would shrink at.
It is strange he should do all this, and diseased so.
I am sure it is true: Lieutenant, can thou drink well?
Would I were drunk, dog-drunk, I might not feel this.
I would take Physic.
But I would know my disease first.
Why? it may be the Collique: can thou, blow backward?
There's never a bag-pipe in the kingdom better.
Is it not a pleurisy?
It is any thing
That has the devil, and death in it: will ye march Gentlemen?
The Prince has taken leave.
How know ye that?
I saw him leave the Court, dispatch his followers,
And met him after in a bye street: I think
He has some wench, or such a toy, to lick over
Before he go: would I had such another
To draw this foolish pain down.
Let's away Gentlemen,
For sure the Prince will stay on us.
We'll attend sir. 
Must ye needs go?
Or stay with all dishonour.
Are there not men enough to fight?
Fie Celia,
This ill becomes the noble love you bear me;
Would you have your love a coward?
No; believe sir,
I would have him fight, but not so far off from me.
Would have it thus? or thus?
If that be fighting—
Ye wanton fool: when I come home again
I'll fight with thee, at thine weapon Celia,
And conquer thee too.
That you have done already,
You need no other Arms to me, but these sir;
But will you fight your self sir?
Thus deep in blood wench,
And through the thickest ranks of Pikes.
Spur bravely,
Your fiery Courser, beat the troops before ye,
And crambe the mouth of death with executions.
I would do more then these: But prithee tell me,
Tell me my fair, where got thou this male spirit?
I wonder at thy mind.
Were I man then,
You would wonder more.
Sure thou would prove a Soldier,
And some great Leader.
Sure I should do somewhat;
And the first thing I did, I should grow envious,
Extremely envious of your youth, and honour.
And fight against me?
Ten to one, I should do it.
Thou would not hurt me?
In this mind I am in,
I think I should be hardly brought to strike ye,
Unless it were thus; but in my mans mind—
What?
I should be friends with ye too,
Now I think better.
Ye are a tall Soldier:
Here, take these, and these;
This gold to furnish ye, and keep this bracelet;
Why do you weep now?
You a masculine spirit?
No, I confess I am a fool, a woman:
And ever when I part with you —
You shall not,
These tears are like prodigious signs, my sweet one,
I shall come back, laden with fame, to honour thee.
I hope you shall:
But then my dear Demetrius,
When you stand Conqueror, and at your mercy
All people bow, and all things waite your sentence;
Say then your eye (surveying all your conquest)
Finds out a beauty, even in sorrow excellent,
A constant face, that in the midst of ruin
With a forced smile, both scorns at fate, and fortune:
Say you find such a one, so nobly fortified,
And in her figure, all the sweets of nature?
Prithee,
No more of this, I cannot find her.
That shows as far beyond my withered beauty;
And will run mad, to love ye too.
Do you fear me,
And do you think, besides this face, this beauty,
This heart, where all my hopes are locked—
I dare not:
No sure, I think ye honest; wondrous honest.
Pray doe not frown, Isle swear ye are.
Ye may choose.
But how long will ye be away?
I know not.
I know you are angry now: pray look upon me:
Isle ask no more such questions.
The Drums beat,
I can no longer stay.
They doe but call yet:
How fine you would leave my company.
I would not,
Unless a greater power then love commanded,
Commands my life, mine honour.
But a little.
Prithee farewell, and be not doubtful of me.
I would not have ye hurt: and ye are so venturous—
But good sweet Prince preserve your self, fight nobly,
But do not thrust this body; it is not yours now,
It is mine, it is only mine: doe not seek wounds, Sir,
For every drop of blood you bleed —
I will Celia,
I will be careful.
My heart, that loves ye dearly.
Prithee no more, we must part: 
Hark, they march now.
Pox on these bawling Drums: I am sure you'll kiss me,
But one kiss? what a parting's this?
Here take me,
And doe what thou wilt with me, smother me;
But still remember, if your fooling with me,
Make me forget the trust—
I have done: farewell sir,
Never look back, you shall not stay, not a minute.
I must have one farewell more.
No, the Drums beat;
I dare not slack your honour; not a hand more,
Only this look; the gods preserve, and save ye.
What have ye found her out?
We have hearkened after her.
What's that to my desire?
Your grace must give us time,
And a little means.
She is sure a stranger,
If she were bred or known here—
Your dull endeavours 
Should never be employed. Welcome Menippus.
I have found her sir,
I mean the place she is lodged in; her name is Celia,
And much a doe I had to purchase that too.
Dost think Demetrius loves her?
Much I fear it,
But nothing that way yet can win for certain.
Isle tell your grace within this hour.
A stranger?
Without all doubt.
But how should he come to her?
There lies the marrow of the matter hid yet.
Has't thou been with thy wife?
No sir, I am going to her.
Go and dispatch, and meet me in the garden,
And get all out ye can. 
Isle doe my best sir. 
Blessed be thy wife, thou were an arrant ass else.
I, she is a stirring woman indeed:
There's a brain brother.
There's not a handsome wench of any mettle
Within an hundred miles, but her intelligence
Reaches her, and out reaches her, and brings her
As confidently to Court, as to a sanctuary:
What had his mouldy brains ever arrived at,
Had not she beaten it out of the Flint to fasten him?
They say she keeps an office of Concealments:
There is no young wench, let her be a Saint,
Unless she live in the Center, but she finds her,
And every way prepares addresses to her:
If my wife would have followed her course Charinthus,
Her lucky course, I had the day before him:
O what might I have been by this time, Brother?
But she (forsooth) when I put these things to her,
These things of honest thrift, groans, ô my conscience,
The load upon my conscience, when to make us cuckolds,
They have no more burden then a brood-goose, brother;
But let's doe what we can, though this wench fail us,
Another of a new way will be looked at:
Come, let's abroad, and beat our brains, time may
For all his wisdom, yet give us a day. 
I will not see 'em fall thus, give me way sir,
I shall forget you love me else.
Will ye lose all?
For me to be forgotten, to be hated,
Nay never to have been a man, is nothing,
So you, and those we have preserved from slaughter
Come safely off.
I have lost my self.
You are cozn'd.
And am most miserable.
There's no man so, but he that makes himself so.
I will go on.
You must not: I shall tell you then,
And tell you true, that man's unfit to govern,
That cannot guide himself: you lead an Army?
That have not so much manly suff'rance left ye,
To bear a loss?
Charge but once more Leontius,
My friends and my companions are engaged all.
Nay give 'em lost, I saw 'em off their horses,
And the enemy master of their Arms; nor could then,
The policy, nor strength of man redeem 'em.
And shall I know this, and stand fooling?
By my dead fathers soul you stir not, sir,
Or if you doe, you make your way through me first.
Thou art a Coward.
To prevent a Madman.
None but your fathers Son, durst call me so,
'Death if he did—Must I be scandall'd by ye,
That hedged in all the helps I had to save ye?
That, where there was a valiant weapon stirring,
Both searched it out, and singled it, unedged it,
For fear it should bite you, am I a coward?
Go, get ye up, and tell 'em ye are the Kings Son;
Hang all your Ladies favours on your Crest,
And let them fight their shares; spur to destruction,
You cannot miss the way: be bravely desperate,
And your young friends before ye, that lost this battle,
Your honourable friends, that knew no order,
Cry out, Antigonus, the old Antigonus,
The wise and fortunate Antigonus,
The great, the valiant, and the feared Antigenus,
Has sent a desperate son, without discretion
To bury in an hour his age of honour.
I am ashamed.
It is ten to one, I die with ye:
The coward will not long be after ye;
I scorn to say I saw you fall, sigh for ye,
And tell a whining tale, some ten years after
To boys and girls in an old chimney corner,
Of what a Prince we had, how bravely spirited;
How young and fair he fell: we'll all go with ye,
And ye shall see us all, like sacrifices
In our best trim, fill up the mouth of ruin,
Will this faith satisfy your folly? can this show ye,
Tic not to die we fear, but to die poorly,
To fall, forgotten, in a multitude?
If you will needs tempt fortune now she has held ye,
Held ye from sinking up.
Pray doe not kill me,
These words pierce deeper then the wounds I suffer,
The smarting wounds of loss.
Ye are too tender;
Fortune has hours of loss, and hours of honour,
And the most valiant feel them both: take comfort,
The next is ours, I have a soul descries it:
The angry bull never goes back for breath,
But when he means to arm his fury double.
Let this day set but not the memory,
And we shall find a time: How now Lieutenant?
I know not: I am mall'd: we are bravely beaten,
All our young gallants lost.
Thou art hurt.
I am peppered,
I was in the midst of all: and banged of all hands:
They made an anvil of my head, it rings yet;
Never so thresh'd: do you call this fame? I have famed it;
I have got immortal fame, but I'll no more on it;
I'll no such scratching Saint to serve hereafter;
O my conscience I was killed above twenty times,
And yet I know not what a Devil's in it,
I crawled away, and lived again still; I am hurt plaguily,
But now I have nothing near so much pain Colonel,
They have sliced me for that malady.
All the young men lost?
I am glad you are here: but they are all in the pound sir,
They'll never ride o'er other men's corn again, I take it,
Such frisking, and such flaunting with their feathers,
And such careering with their mistress favours;
And here must he be pricking out for honour,
And there got he a knock, and down goes pilgarlike,
Commends his soul to his she-saint, and exit.
Another spurs in there, cries make room villains,
I am a Lord, scarce spoken, but with reverence
A rascal takes him o'er the face, and fels him;
There lies the Lord, the Lord be with him.
Now sir,
Doe you find this truth?
I would not.
Pox upon it,
They have such tender bodies too; such Cullisses,
That one good handsome blow breaks 'em a pieces.
How stands the Enemy?
Even cool enough too:
For to say truth, he has bin shrewdly heated,
The gentleman no doubt will fall to his jewlips.
He marches not in the tail on's.
No, plague take him,
He will kiss our tails as soon; he looks upon us,
As if he would say, if ye will turn again, friends,
We will belabor you a little better,
And beat a little more care into your coxcombs.
Now shall we have damnable Ballads out against us,
Most wicked madrigals: and ten to one Colonel,
Sung to such lousy, lamentable tunes.
Thou art merry,
How ever the game goes: good sir be not troubled,
A better day will draw this back again.
Pray go, and cheer those left, and lead 'em off,
They are hot, and weary.
I'll doe any thing.
Lieutenant, send one presently away
To the King, and let him know our state: and hark ye,
Be sure the messenger advise his Majesty
To comfort up the Prince: hoe's full of sadness.
When shall I get a Surgeon? this hot weather,
Unless I be well peppered, I shall stink Colonel.
Go, I'll prepare thee one.
If ye catch me then,
Fighting again, I'll eat hay with a horse. 
Have ye written to Marion?
Yes, Madam.
And let her understand the hopes she has
If she come speedily —
All these are specified,
And of the chain is sent her,
And the rich stuff to make her show more handsome here?
All this is done, Madam.
What have you dispatcht there?
A letter to the Country maid, and't please ye.
A pretty girl, but peevish, plaguy peevish:
Have ye bought the embroidered gloves, and that purse for her,
And the new Curl?
They are ready packed up Madam.
Her maiden-head will yield me; let me see now,
She is not fifteen they say: for her complexion—
Cloe, Cloe, Cloe, here, I have her,
Cloe, the Daughter of a Country gentleman;
Her age upon fifteen: now her complexion,
A lovely browne; here it is; eyes black and rolling,
The body neatly built: she strikes a Lute well,
Sings most inticingly: these helps considered,
Her maiden-head will amount to some three hundred,
Or three hundred &amp; fifty crowns; 'twil bear it handsomely.
Her father's poor, some little share deducted,
To buy him a hunting Nag; I, twill be pretty:
Who takes care of the Merchants wife?
I have wrought her.
You know for whom she is?
Very well, Madam,
Though very much ado, I had to make her
Apprehend that happiness.
These kind are subtle:
Did she not cry and blubber when ye urged her.
O most extremely, &amp; swore she would rather perish.
Good signs, very good signs,
Symptoms of easy nature.
Had she the plate?
She looked upon it, and left it,
And turned again, and viewed it.
Very well still.
At length she was content to let it lye there,
Till I called for it, or so,
She will come?
Doe you take me
For such a fool, I would part without that promise?
The Chambers next the park.
The Widow Madam,
You bad me look upon.
Hang her, she is mustic:
She is no mans meat; beside, she is poor and sluttish:
Where lies old Thisbe now, you are so so long now—
Thisbe, Thisbe, This. agent Thisbe, ô I have her,
She lies now in Nicopolis.
Dispatch a packet,
And tell her, her superior here commands her,
The next Mon'th not to fail, but see delivered
Here to our use, some twenty young and handsome,
As also able maids, for the Court service,
As she will answer it: we are out of beauty,
Utterly out, and rub the time away here,
With such blown stuff, I am ashamed to send it. 
Who's that? look out, to your business maid,
There's nothing got by idleness: There is a Lady,
Which if I can but buckle with, Altea,
A, A, A, A, Altea, young, and married,
And a great lover of her husband, well,
Not to be brought to Court: say ye so? I am sorry,
The Court shall be brought to you then: how now, who is it?
An ancient woman, with a maid attending,
A pretty girl, but out of clothes; for a little money,
It seems she would put her to your bringing up, Madam,
Let her come in. Would ye ought with us, good woman?
I pray be short, we are full of business.
I have a tender girl here, and't please your honour.
Very well.
That hath a great desire to serve your worship.
It may be so; I am full of Maids.
She is young, forsooth—
And for her truth; and as they say her bearing.
Ye say well: come ye hither maid, let me feel your pulse,
It is some what weak, but nature will grow stronger,
Let me see your leg, she treads but low in the pasterns.
A cork heel Madam.
We know what will doe it,
Without your aim good woman: what do you pitch her at?
Shoe's but a slight toy—cannot hold out long.
Even what you think is meet.
Give her ten Crowns, we are full of business,
She is a poor woman, let her take a Cheese home:
Enter the wench in the office. 
What's your name, sister?
Phebe forsooth.
A pretty name; twill doe well:
Go in, and let the other maid instruct ye Phebe; 
Let my old velvet skirt be made fit for her,
I'll put her into action for a wascoate,
And when I have rigged her up once, this small Pinnace
Shall sail for gold, and good store too: who's there? 
Lord, shall we never have any ease in this world?
Still troubled? still molested? what would you have?
I cannot furnish ye faster then I am able
And ye were my husband a thousand times, I cannot do it;
At least a dozen posts are gone this morning
For several parts of the Kingdom: I can do no more
But pay 'em, and instruct 'em.
Prithee, good sweet heart,
I come not to disturb thee, nor discourage thee,
I know thou labour truly: hark in thine ear.
Ha?
What do you make so dainty on it? look there,
I am an Ass, I can do nothing.
Celia?
I, this is she; a stranger borne.
What would you give for more now?
Prithee, my best Leucippe, ther's much hangs ont
Lodged at the end of Marse's street? thats true too;
At the sack of such a Town, by such a Soldier
Preserved a prisoner: and by Prince Demetrius
Bought from that man again, maintained, and favoured:
How came you by this knowledge?
Poor weak man,
I have a thousand eyes, when thou art sleeping,
Abroad, and full of business.
You never tried her?
No, she is beyond my level; so hedged in
By the Princes infinite love, and favour to her—
She is a handsome wench.
A delicate, and knows it;
And out of that proof arms her self.
Come in then;
I have a great design from the King to you,
And you must work like wax now.
On this Lady?
On this, and all your wits call home.
I have done.
Toys in my time of some note; old as I am,
I think my brains will work without barm,
Take up the Books.
As we go in, I'll tell ye. 
No face of sorrow for this loss? twill choke him,
Nor no man miss a friend, I know his nature
So deep impressed with grief, for what he has suffered,
That the least adding to it, adds to his ruin;
His loss is not so infinite, I hope Soldier.
Faith neither great, nor out of discretion,
The young men out of heate.
I guess the manner.
The Prince and't like your Grace—
You are welcome home sir;
Come, no more sorrow, I have heard your fortune,
And I my self have tried the like: clear up man,
I will not have ye take it thus; if I doubted.
Your fear had lost; and that you had turned your back to 'em,
Basely besought their mercies—
No, no, by this hand sir,
We fought like honest and tall men.
I know it Leontius; or if I thought
Neglect of rule, having his council with ye,
Or too vaine-glorious appetite of fame,
Your men forgot, and scattered.
None of these sir,
He showed himself a noble gentleman,
Every way apt to rule.
These being granted;
Why should you think you have done an act so heinous,
That nought but discontent dwells round about ye?
I have lost a Battle.
I, and fought it hard too.
With as much means as man—
Or devil could urge it.
Twenty to one of our side now.
Turn Tables,
Beaten like dogs again, like Owls, you take it
To hart for flying but a mile before 'em,
And to say truth, it was no flight neither sir,
It was but a walk, a handsome walk,
I have tumbled with this old body, beaten like a stock-fish,
And stuck with arrows, like an arming Quiver,
Blotted and banged, almost a day before 'em,
And glad I have got off then. Here's a mad shaver,
He fights his share I am sure, when ere he comes to it;
Yet I have seen him trip it tidily too,
And cry the devil take the hindmost ever.
I learned it of my betters.
Boudge at this?
Has fortune but one face?
In her best vizard,
Me thinks she looks but lowzily.
Chance, though she faint now,
And sink below our expectations,
Is there no hope left strong enough to boy her?
It is not this day, I fled before the enemy,
And lost my people, left mine honour murdered,
My maiden honour, never to be ransomed,
(Which to a noble soul is too too sensible)
Afflicts me with this sadness; most of these,
Time may turn straight again, experience perfect,
And new swords, cut new ways to nobler fortunes.
O I have lost—
As you are mine forget it:
I doe not think it loss.
O sir, forgive me,
I have lost my friends, those worthy souls bred with me,
I have lost my self, they were the pieces of me;
I have lost all Arts, my Schools are taken from me,
Honour and Arms, no emulation left me:
I lived to see these men lost, looked upon it;
These men that twined their loves to mine, their virtues,
O shame of shames, I saw, and could not save 'em,
This carries sulphur in it, this burns and boils me,
And like a fatal Tomb bestrides my memory.
This was hard fortune, but if alive, and taken,
They shall be ransomed; let it be at Millions.
They are dead, they are dead.
When would he weep for me thus?
I may be dead, and powdered.
Good Prince, grieve not:
We are not certain of their deaths: the enemy,
Though he be hot, and keen,
Yet holds good Quarter.
What noise is this?
He doe's not follow us?
Give me a steeple top.
They live, they live sir.
Hold up your manly face;
They live, they are here, Son.
These are the men.
They are, and live to honour ye.
How escaped ye noble friends? me thought I saw ye
Even in the jaws of death.
Thanks to our folly,
That spurred us on; we were indeed hedged round in it,
And even beyond the hand of succour beaten,
Unhorsed, disarmed: and what we looked for then sir,
Let such poor weary souls that hear the Bell knoll,
And see the grave a digging, tell.
For heaven sake
Delude mine eyes no longer: how came ye off?
Against all expectation: the brave Seleucus,
I think this day enamoured on your virtue,
When, through the Troops, he saw ye shoot like lightning;
And at your manly courage all took fire,
And after that, the misery we fell too,
The never-certaine fate of war considering,
As we stood all before him, fortunes ruins,
Nothing but death expecting, a short time
He made a stand upon our youths and fortunes,
Then with an eye of mercy informed his judgement,
How yet unripe we were, unblowne, unhardend,
Unfitted for such fatal ends; he cried out to us,
Go Gentlemen, commend me to your Master,
To the most high, and hopeful prince Demetrius,
Tell him the valour that he showed against me
This day, the virgin valour, and true fire
Deserves, even from an Enemy, this curtsy;
Your lives and Arms freely I'll give 'em: thank him,
And thus we are returned Sir.
Faith it was well done;
It was bravely done; was it not a noble part Sir?
Had I been there up had I gone, I am sure on it;
These noble tricks, I never durst trust 'em yet.
Let me not live, and't were not a famed honesty,
It takes me such a tickling way: now would I wish heaven,
But ee'n the happiness, ee'n that poor blessing
For all the sharp afflictions thou hast sent me,
But ee'n in the head of the field to take Seleucus.
I should doe something memorable: fie, sad still.
Doe you grieve we are come off?
Unransom'd, was it?
It was sir.
And with such a fame to me?
Said ye not so?
Ye have heard it.
O Leontius,
Better I had lost 'em all: my self had perished,
And all my fathers hopes,
Mercy upon ye,
What aisle ye Sir? 'death, doe not make fools on's,
Neither go to Church, nor tarry at home,
That's a fine Horne-pipe?
VVhat's now your grief Demetrius?
Did he not beat us twice?
He beat a pudding;
Beat us but once.
Has beat me twice, and beat me to a coward,
Beat me to nothing.
Is not the devil in him?
I pray it be no worse.
Twice conquered me.
Bear witness all the world, I am a dunce here.
With valour first he struck me, then with honour;
That stroke Leontius, that struck, dost thou not feel it?
Where abouts was it? for I remember nothing yet.
All these gentlemen
That were his prisoners—
Yes, he set 'em free sir,
With Arms and honour.
There, there, now thou hast it;
At mine own weapon, Curtsy, he has beaten me,
At that I was held a Master in, he has cowed me,
Hotter then all the dint of the fight he has charged me:
Am I not now a wretched fellow? think on it;
And when thou hast examined all ways honourable,
And find no door left open to requite this,
Conclude I am a wretch, and was twice beaten.
I have observed your way, and understand it,
And equal love it as Demetrius,
My noble child thou shalt not fall in virtue,
I and my power will sink first: you Leontius,
Wait for a new Commission, ye shall out again,
And instantly: you shall not lodge this night here,
Not see a friend, nor take a blessing with ye,
Before ye be ith'field: the enemy is up still,
And still in full dnsigne: Charge him again, Son,
And either bring home that again thou hast lost there,
Or leave thy body by him.
Ye raise me,
And now I dare look up again, Leontius.
I, I, sir, I am thinking who we shall take of 'em,
To make all straight; and who we shall give to the devil.
What say thou now Lieutenant?
I say nothing.
Lord what ail I, that I have no mind to fight now?
I find my constitution mightily altered
Since I came home: I hate all noises too,
Especially the noise of Drums; I am now as well
As any living man; why not as valiant?
To fight now, is a kind of vomit to me,
It goes against my stomach.
Good sir, presently;
You cannot doe your Son, so fair a favour.
It is my intent: Isle see ye march away too;
Come, get your men together presently, Leontius,
And press where please you, as you march.
We go sir.
Wait you on me, Isle bring ye to your command,
And then to fortune give you up.
Ye love me. 
Go, get the drums, beat round, Lieutenant.
Hark ye, sir,
I have a foolish business they call marriage.
After the wars are done.
The party stays sir,
I have given the Priest his money too: all my friends sir,
My father, and my mother.
Will you go forward?
She brings a pretty matter with her.
Half a dozen Bastards.
Some forty sir.
A goodly competency.
I mean sir, pounds a year; Isle dispatch the matter,
It is but a night or two; Isle overtake ye sir.
The 2 old legions, yes: where lies the horse-quarter?
And if it be a boy, Isle even make bold sir.
Away with your whore,
A plague o'your whore, you damned rogue,
Now ye are cured and well; must ye be clicketing?
I have broke my mind to my Ancient, in my absence,
Hoe's a sufficient gentleman.
Get forward.
Only receive her portion.
Get ye forward;
Else Isle bang ye forward.
Strange sir,
A Gentleman and an officer cannot have the liberty
To doe the office of a man.
Shame light on thee,
How came this whore into thy head?
This whore sir?
It is strange, a poor whore.
Doe not answer me:
Troop, Troop away; doe not name this whore again,
Or think there is a whore.
That's very hard sir.
For if thou dost, look to it, Isle have thee gilded,
Isle walk ye out before me: not a word more. 
Ye are the Mistress of the house ye say,
Where this young Lady lies.
For want of a better.
You may be good enough for such a purpose:
When was the Prince with her? answer me directly.
Not since he went a warring.
Very well then:
What carnal copulation are you privy too
Between these two? be not afraid, we are women,
And may talk thus amongst our selves, no harm in it.
No sure, there's no harm in it, I conceive that;
But truly, that I ever knew the gentlewoman
Otherwise given, then a hopeful gentlewoman—
You'll grant me the Prince loves her?
There I am with ye.
And the gods bless her, promises her mightily.
Stay there a while. And gives her gifts?
Extremely;
And truly makes a very Saint of her.
I should think now,
(Good woman let me have your judgement with me,
I see it is none of the worst: Come sit down by me)
That these two cannot love so tenderly.
Being so young as they are too.
You say well—
But that methinks some further promises —
Yes, yes,
I have heard the Prince swear he would marry her.
Very well still: they doe not use to fall out?
The tenderest Chickens to one another,
They cannot live an hour asunder.
I have done then;
And be you gone; you know your charge, and doe it.
You know whose will it is; if you transgress it—
That is, if any have access, or see her,
Before the Kings will be fulfilled—
Not the Prince, Madam?
You'll be hanged if you it, that Isle assure ye.
But ne'er the less, Isle make bold to obey ye.
Away, and to your business then.
It is done, Madam. 
THou hast taken wondrous pains; but yet Menippus,
You understand not of what blood, &amp; country.
I laboured that, but cannot come to know it.
A Greek I am sure she is, she speaks this language.
Is she so excellent handsome?
Most enticing.
Sold for a prisoner?
Yes sir,
Some poor creature.
And he loves tenderly?
They say extremely.
It is well prevented then: yes, I perceived it:
When he took leave now, he made a hundred stops,
Desired an hour, but half an hour, a minute,
Which I with anger crossed; I knew his business,
I knew it was she he hunted on; this journey, man,
I beat out suddenly for her cause intended,
And would not give him time to breath. When comes she?
This morning sir.
Lodge her to all delight then:
For I would have her tried to the test: I know,
She must be some cracked coin, not fit his traffic,
Which when we have found, the shame will make him leave her,
Or we shall work a nearer way: Isle bury him,
And with him all the hopes I have cast upon him,
Ere he shall dig his own grave in that woman:
You know which way to bring her: Isle stand close there,
To view her as she passes: and doe you hear Menippus,
Observe her with all sweetness: humour her,
Twill make her lie more careless to our purposes.
Away, and take what helps you please.
I am gone sir. 
Governess, from whom was this Gown sent me?
Prithee be serious true; I will not were it else:
It is a handsome one.
As though you know not?
No faith:
But I believe, for certain too, yet I wonder,
Because it was his caution, this poor way,
Still to preserve me from the curious searchings
Of greedy eyes.
You have it: does it please you?
It is very rich, methinks too, prithee tell me?
From one that likes you well, never look coy, Lady;
These are no gifts, to be put off with poutings.
Powtings, and gifts? is it from any stranger?
You are so curious, that there is no talk to ye.
What if it be I pray ye?
Unpin good Governess,
Quick, quick.
Why, what's the matter?
Quick, good Governess:
Fie on it, how beastly it becomes me? poorly?
A trick put in upon me? well said Governess:
I vow I would not wear it—out, it smells musty.
Are these your tricks? now I begin to smell it
Abominable musty; will ye help me?
The Prince will come again—
You are not mad sure?
As I live isle cut it off: a pox upon it;
For sure it was made for that use; do you bring me Livories?
Stales to catch Kites? dost thou laugh too, thou base woman?
I cannot choose, if I should be hanged.
Abuse me,
And then laugh at me too?
I doe not abuse ye:
Is it abuse, to give him drink that's thirsty?
You want clothes; is it such a heinous sin I beseech ye,
To see you stored?
There is no greater wickedness
Then this way.
What way?
I shall curse thee fearfully,
If thou provok'st me further: and take heed, woman;
My curses never miss.
Curse him that sent it.
Tell but his name—
You dare not curse him.
Dare not?
By this fair light—
You are so full of passion—
Dare not be good? be honest? dare not curse him?
I think you dare not: I believe so.
Speak him.
Up with your valour then, up with it bravely,
And take your full charge.
If I doe not, hang me;
Tell but his name.
It was Prince Demetrius sent it:
Now, now, give fire, kill him in the eye now Lady.
Is he come home?
It seems so; but your curse now.
You doe not lie, I hope.
You dare not curse him.
Prithee do not abuse me: is he come home indeed?
For I would now with all my heart believe thee.
Nay, you may choose: alas, I deal for strangers,
That send ye scurvy musty Gowns, stale Livories:
I have my tricks.
It is a good gown, a handsome one;
I did but jest; where is he?
He that sent it—
How? he that sent it? is it come to that again?
Thou can not be so foolish: prithee speak out,
I may mistake thee.
I said he that sent it.
Curse of my life: why dost thou vex me thus?
I know thou meanst Demetrius, dost thou not?
I charge thee speak truth: if it be any other,
Thou know the charge he gave thee, and the justice
His anger will inflict, if here he know this,
As know he shall, he shall, thou spiteful woman,
Thou beastly woman; and thou shalt know too late too,
And feel too sensible, I am no ward,
No sale stuff for your money Merchants that sent it?
Who dare send me, or how durst thou, thou—
What you please:
For this is ever the reward of service.
The Prince shall bring the next himself.
It is strange
That you should deal so peevishly: beshrew ye,
You have put me in a heat.
I am sure ye have kilt me:
I ne'er received such language: I can but wait upon ye,
And be your drudge; keep a poor life to serve ye.
You know my nature is too easy, Governess,
And you know now, I am sorry too: how does he?
O God, my head.
Prithee be well, and tell me,
Did he speak of me, since he came? nay, see now,
If thou wilt leave this tyranny? good sweet governess,
Did he but name his Celia? look upon me,
Upon my faith I meant no harm: here, take this,
And buy thy self some rrifles: did a good wench?
He loves ye but too dearly.
That's my good Governess.
There's more clothes making for ye.
More clothes?
More:
Richer and braver; I can tell ye that news;
And twenty glorious things.
To what use sirrah?
Ye are too good for our house now: we poor wretches
Shall lose the comfort of ye.
No, I hope not.
For ever lose ye Lady.
Lose me? wherefore?
I hear of no such thing.
It is sure it must be so:
You must shine now at Court: such preparation,
Such hurry, and such hanging rooms—
To the Court wench?
Was it to the Court thou said?
You'll find it so.
Stay, stay, this cannot be.
I say it must be:
I hope to find ye still the same good Lady.
To the Court? this stumbles me: art sure for me, wench,
This preparation is?
She is peilous crafty:
I fear too honest for us all too. Am I sure I live?
To the Court? this cannot down: what should I do there?
Why should he on a sudden change his mind thus,
And not make me acquainted? sure he loves me;
His vow was made against it, and mine with him:
At least while this King lived: he will come hither,
And see me ere I go?
Would some wise woman
Had her in working: that I think he will not,
Because he means with all joy there to meet ye.
Ye shall hear more within this hour?
A Courtier?
What may that meaning be? sure he will see me
If he be come, he must: Hark ye good Governess,
What age is the King of?
Hoe's an old man, and full of business.
I fear too full indeed: what Ladies are there?
I would be loath to want good company.
Delicate young Ladies, as you would desire;
And when you are acquainted, the best company.
It is very well: prithee go in, let's talk more.
For though I fear a trick, Isle bravely try it.
I see he must be cunning,
Knoks this Doe down. 
You shall not have your will, sirrah, are ye running?
Have ye gotten a toy in your heals? Is this a season,
When honour pricks ye on, to prick your ears up,
After your whore, your Hobby-horse?
Why look ye now:
What a strange man are you? would you have a man fight
At all hours all alike.
Doe but fight something;
But half a blow, and put thy stomach to it:
Turn but thy face, and do but make mouths at 'em.
And have my teeth knocked out; I thank ye heartily,
Ye are my dear friend.
What a devil ails thee?
Dost long to be hanged?
Faith Sir, I make no suit for it:
But rather then I would live thus our of charity,
Continually in brawling—
Art thou not he?
I may be cozn'd—
I shall be discovered.
That in the midst of thy most hellish pains,
When thou were crawling sick, did aim at wonders,
When thou were mad with pain?
Ye have found the cause out;
I had ne'er been mad to fight else: I confess sir,
The daily torture of my side that vexed me,
Made me as daily careless what became of me,
Till a kind sword there wounded me, and eased me;
It was nothing in my valour fought; I am well now,
And take some pleasure in my life, methinks now,
It shows as mad a thing to me to see you scuffle,
And kill one another foolishly for honour,
As it was to you, to see me play the cox-combe.
And wilt thou ne'er fight more?
In the mind I am in,
Nor never be sick again?
I hope I shall not.
Prithee be sick again; prithee, I beseech thee,
Be just so sick again.
Isle just be hanged first.
If all the Arts that are can make a Chollique,
Therefore look to it: or if imposthumes, mark me,
As big as foot-bals—
Deliver me.
Or stones of ten pound weight in the kidneys,
Through ease and ugly diets may be gathered;
Isle feed ye up my self sir, Isle prepare ye,
You cannot fight, unless the devil tear ye,
You shall not want provocations, Isle scratch ye,
Isle have thee have the tooth-ach, and the head-ach.
Good Colonel, Isle doe any thing.
No, no, nothing—
Then will I have thee blown with a pair of Smiths bellows,
Because ye shall be sure to have a round gale with ye,
Filed full of oil, of devil, and Aqua fortis,
And let these work, these may provoke.
Good Colonel.
A coward in full blood; prithee be plain with me,
Will roasting doe thee any good?
Nor basting neither, sir.
Marry that goes hard. 
Where are you Colonel?
The Prince expects ye sir; has hedged the enemy
Within a straight, where all the hopes and valours
Of all men living cannot force a passage,
He has 'em now.
I knew all this before sir,
I chalked him out his way: but do you see that thing there?
Nay good sweet Colonel, Isle fight a little.
That thing?
What thing? I see the brave Lieutenant.
Rogue, what a name hast thou lost?
You may help it?
Yet you may helped: Isle doe ye any curtsy:
I know you love a wench well. 
Look upon him;
Doe you look too.
What should I look on?
I come to tell ye, the Prince stays your direction,
We have 'em now ith Coop, sir.
Let 'em rest there,
And chew upon their miseries: but look first—
I cannot fight for all this.
Look on this fellow.
I know him; it is the valiant brave Lieutenant.
Can thou hear this, and play the rogue? steal off quickly,
Behind me quickly, neatly doe it,
And rush into the thickest of the enemy,
And if thou kill but two.
You may excuse me,
It is not my fault: I dare not fight.
Be ruled yet
Isle beat thee on; go wink and fight: a plague upon your sheeps heart.
What's all this matter?
Nay I cannot show ye.
Here's twenty pound, go but smell to 'em.
Alas sir,
I have taken such a cold I can smell nothing.
I can smell a rascal, a rank rascal:
Fie, how he stinks, stinks like a tyred Jade.
What sir?
Why, that sir, doe not you smell him?
Smell him?
I must endure.
Stinks like a dead dog, Carrion—
There's no such damnable smell under heaven,
As the faint sweat of a Coward: will ye fight yet?
Nay, now I defy ye; ye have spoke the worst, ye can
Of me, and if every man should take what you say
To the heart. —
God a mercy,
God a mercy with all my heart; here I forgive thee;
And fight, or fight not, doe but go along with us,
And keep my dog.
I love a good dog naturally.
What's all this stir, Lieutenant?
Nothing Sir,
But a slight matter of argument.
Pox take thee.
Sure I shall love this rogue, he's so pretty a Coward,
Come gentlemen, let's up now, and if fortune
Dare play the slut again, Isle never more Saint her,
Come play fellow, come, prithee come up; come chicken,
I have a way shall fit yet: A tame knave.
Come, look upon us.
Isle tell ye who does best boys. 
I saw her coming out,
Who waits upon her?
Tymon, Charinthus, and some other gentlemen,
By me appointed.
VVhere's your wife?
Shoe's ready
To entertain her here sir; and some Ladies
Fit for her lodgings.
How shows she in her trim now?
Oh most divinely sweet.
Prithee speak softly.
How does she take her coming?
She bears it bravely;
But what she thinks—I or heaven sake sir preserve me—
If the Prince chance to find this.
Peace ye old fool;
She thinks to meet him here.
That's all the Project.
Was she hard to bring?
No, she believed it quickly,
And quickly made her self fit, the Gown a little,
And those new things she has not been acquainted with,
At least in this place, where she lived a prisoner,
Troubled and stirred her mind, But believe me sir,
She has worn as good, they sit so opted to her;
And she is so great a Mistress of disposure:
Here they come now: but take a full view of her.
How cheerfully she looks? how she salutes all?
And how she views the place? she is very young sure:
That was an admirable smile, a catching one,
The very twang of Cupids bow sung to it:
She has two-edg'd eyes, they kill of both sides.
She makes a stand, as though she would speak.
Be still then.
Good Gentlemen, trouble your selves no further,
I had thought sure to have met a noble friend here.
Ye may meet many Lady.
Such as you are
I covet few or none, sir.
Will you walk this way,
And take the sweets of the garden? cool and close, Lady.
Methinks this open aire's far better, tend ye that way.
Pray whore's the woman came along?
What woman?
The woman of the house I lay at.
Woman?
Here was none came along sure.
Sure I am caught then:
Pray whore's the Prince?
He will not be long from ye,
We are his humble servants.
I could laugh now,
To see how finely I am cozn'd: yet I fear not,
For sure I know a way to scope all dangers.
Madam, your lodgings lye this way.
My Lodgings?
For heaven sake sir, what office doe I bear here?
The great cōmander of all hearts 
You have hit it.
I thank your sweet-heart for it. Who are these now?
Ladies that come to serve ye.
Well considered,
Are you my servants?
Servants to your pleasures.
I dare believe ye, but I dare not trust ye:
Caught with a trick? well, I must bear it patiently:
Methinkes this Court's a neat place: all the people
Of such refined a size—
This is no poor rogue.
Were it a Paradise to please your fancy,
And entertain the sweetness you bring with ye;
Take breath;
You are fat, and many words may melt ye,
This is three Bawds beaten into one; bless me heaven,
What shall become of me? I am in the pitfall:
Of my conscience, this is the old viper, and all these little ones
Creep every night into her belly; do you hear plump servant
And you my little sucking Ladies, you must teach me,
For I know you are excellent at carriage,
How to behave my self, for I am rude yet:
But you say the Prince will come?
Will fly to see you.
For look you if a great man, say the King now
Should come and visit me?
She names ye.
Peace fool.
And offer me a kindness, such a kindness.
I, such a kindness.
True Lady such a kindness,
What shall that kindness be now?
A witty Lady,
Learn little ones, learn.
Say it be all his favour.
And a sweet saying it is.
And I grow peevish?
You must not be neglectful.
There's the matter,
There's the maine doctrine now, and I may miss it.
Or a kind handsome Gentleman?
You say well.
They'll count us basely bred.
Not freely nurtured.
I'll take thy counsel.
It is an excellent woman.
I find a notable volume here, a learned one;
Which way? for I would fine be in my chamber;
In truth sweet Ladies, I grow weary; fie,
How hot the air beats on me?
This way Madam?
Now by mine honour, I grow wondrous faint too.
Your fans sweet Gentlewomen, your fans.
Since I am foold,
I'll make my self some sport, though I pay dear for it. 
You see now what a manner of woman she is sir.
Thou art an ass.
Is this a fit love for the Prince?
A coxcomb:
Now by my crown a dainty wench, a sharpe wench,
And a matchless spirit: how she Jeered 'em?
How carelessly she scoffed 'em? use her nobly;
I would I had not seen her: waite anon,
And then you shall have more to trade upon. 
We must keep a round, and a strong watch to night,
The Prince will not charge the Enemy till the morning:
But for the trick I told ye for this rascal,
This rogue, that health and strong heart makes a coward.
I, if it take.
Ne'er fear it, the Prince has it,
And if he let it fall, I must not know it;
He will suspect me presently: but you two
May help the plough.
That he is sick again.
Extremely sick: his disease grown incurable,
Never yet found, nor touched at. 
Well, we have it
And here he comes.
The Prince has been upon him,
What a flatten face he has now? it takes believe it;
How like an ass he looks?
I feel no great pain,
At least, I think I do not; yet I feel sensibly
I grow extremely faint: how cold I sweat now?
So, so, so.
And now it is even too true, I feel a pricking,
A pricking, a strange pricking: how it tingles?
And as it were a stitch too: the Prince told me,
And every one cried out I was a dead man;
I had thought I had been as well—
Upon him now boys,
And do it most demurely.
How now Lieutenant?
I thank ye Gentlemen.
Life, how looks this man?
How dost thou good Lieutenant?
I ever told ye
This man was never cured, I see it too plain now;
How do you feel your self? you look not perfect,
How dull his eye hangs?
That may be discontent.
Believe me friend, I would not suffer now
The with of those pains this man feels; mark his forehead
What a cloud of cold dew hangs upon it?
I have it,
Again I have it; how it grows upon me?
A miserable man I am.
Ha, ha, ha,
A miserable man thou shalt be,
This is the tamest trout I ever tickell•.
This way he went. 
Pray heaven we find him living,
He's a brave fellow, it is pity he should perish thus.
A strong hearted man, &amp; of a notable sufferance.
Oh, oh.
How now? how is it man?
Oh Gentlemen,
Never so full of pain.
Did I not tell ye?
Never so full of pain Gentlemen.
He is here;
How do you sir?
Be of good comfort Soldier,
The Prince has sent us to you.
Do you think I may live?
He alters hourly, strangely.
Yes, you may live: but—
Finely butted Doctor.
Do not discourage him.
He must be told truth,
It is now too late to trifle. 
Here the Prince comes.
How now Gentlemen?
Be wailing sir, a Soldier,
And one I think, your Grace will grieve to part with,
But every living thing—
It is true, must perish,
Our lives are but our marches to our graves,
How dost thou now Lieutenant?
Faith it is true sir,
We are but spans, and candles ends.
He's finely mortified.
Thou art heart whole yet; I see he alters strangely,
And that a pace too; I saw it this morning in him,
When he poor man, I dare swear—
No believe it sir,
I never felt it.
Here is lies the pain now: how he is swel'd?
The Impostume
Fed with a new malignant humour now,
Will grow to such a bigness, it is incredible,
The compass of a bushel will not hold it,
And with such a hell of torture it will rise too.—
Can you endure me touch it?
Oh, I beseech you sir:
I feel you sensibly ere you come near me.
He's finely wrought, he must be cut, no cure else,
And suddenly, you see how fast he blows out.
Good Master Doctor, let me be beholding to you,
I feel I cannot last.
For what Lieutenant?
But even for half a dozen Cans of good wine,
That I may drink my will out: I faint hideously.
Fetch him some wine; and since he must go gentlemen
Why let him take his journey merrily. 
That's even the nearest way.
I could laugh dead now.
Here, off with that.
These two I give your Grace,
A poor remembrance of a dying man sir,
And I beseech you wear 'em out.
I will Soldier,
These are fine legacies.
Among the Gentlemen,
Even all I have left; I am a poor man, naked,
Yet something for remembrance: four a piece Gentlemen,
And so my body where you please.
It will work.
I make your Grace my executor, and I beseech ye
See my poor will fulfilled: sure I shall walk else.
As full as they can be sill'd, here's my hand Soldier.
The wine will tickle him.
I would hear a drum beat,
But to see how I could endure it.
Beat a drum there. 
Oh heavenly music, I would hear one sing to it,
I am very full of pain.
Sing? it is impossible.
Why, then I would drink a drum full:
Where lies the Enemy?
Why, here close by.
Now he begins to muster.
And dare ye fight?
Dare ye fight Gentlemen?
You must not cut him:
He's gone then in a moment; all the hope left, is
To work his weakness into sudden anger,
And make him raise his passion above his pain,
And so dispose him on the enemy;
His body then, being stirred with violence,
Will purge it self and break the sore.
It is true sir.
And then my life for his.
I will not dye thus.
But he is too weak to doe—
Dye like a dog?
I, he's weak, but yet he's heart whole.
Hem.
An excellent sign.
Hem.
Stronger still, and better.
Hem, hem; tan, tan, tan, tan, tan. 
Now he's in the way on it.
Well go thy ways, thou wilt do something certain.
And some brave thing, or let mine ears be cut off.
He's finely wrought.
Let's after him.
I pray Sir;
But how this rogue, when this cloud's melted in him,
And all discovered. —
That's for an after mirth, away, away, away. 
Let no man fear to dye: we love to sleep all,
And death is but the sounder sleep; all ages,
And all hours call us; it is so common, easy,
That little children tread those paths before us;
We are not sick, nor our souls pressed with sorrows,
Nor go we out like tedious tales, forgotten;
High, high we come, and hearty to our funerals,
And as the Sun that sets, in blood let's fall.
It is true, they have us fast, we cannot scope 'em,
Nor keeps the brow of fortune one smile for us,
Dishonourable ends we can scope though,
And (worse then those, captivities) we can die,
And dying nobly, though we leave behind us
These clods of flesh, that are too massy burdens,
Our living souls fly crowned with living conquests.
They have begun, fight bravely, and fall bravely;
And may that man that seeks to save his life now
By price, or promise, or by fear false from us, 
Never again be blessed with name of Soldier.
How now? who charged first? I seek a brave hand
To set me off in death.
We are not charged sir,
The Prince lies still.
How comes this Latum up then?
There is one desperate fellow, with the devil in him
(He never durst do this else) has broke into us,
And here he bangs ye two or three before him,
There five or six; ventures upon whole companies.
And is not seconded?
Not a man follows.
Nor cut a pieces?
Their wonder yet has staid 'em.
Let's in, and see this miracle?
I admire it. 
Fetch him off, fetch him off; I am sure he's clouted;
Did I not 〈◊〉 you how it would take?
It is admirable.
Follow that blow, my friend, there's at your coxcombs,
I fight to save me from the Surgeons miseries.
How the knave curries 'em?
You cannot rogues,
Till you have my diseases, fly my fury,
Ye bread and butter rogues, do ye run from me?
And my side would give me leave, I would so hunt ye,
Ye porridge gutted slaves, ye veale-broth boobies.
Enough, enough Lieutenant, thou hast done bravely.
Mirror of man.
There's a flag for ye sir,
I took it out of the shop, and never paid for it,
I'll to 'em again, I am not come to the text yet.
No more my soldier: beshrew my heart he is hurt sore.
Hang him, he will lick all those whole.
Now will we take him,
And cure him in a trice.
Be careful of him.
Let me live but two years,
And doe what ye will with me;
I never had but two hours yet of happiness;
Pray ye give me nothing to provoke my valour,
For I am even as weary of this fighting—
Ye shall have nothing; come to the Princes Tent
And there the Surgeons presently shall search ye,
Then to your rest.
A little handsome litter
To lay me in, and I shall sleep.
Look to him.
I do believe a horse begot this fellow,
He never knew his strength yet; they are our own.
I think so, I am cozened else; I would but see now
A way to fetch these off, and save their honours.
Only their lives.
Pray ye take no way of peace now,
Unless it be with infinite advantage.
I shall be ruled;
Let the battles now move forward, 
Our self will give the signal:
Now Harold, what's your message?
From my Masters
This honourable curtsy, a Parley
For half an hour, no more sir.
Let 'em come on,
They have my princely word.
They are here to attend ye.
Now Princes, your demands?
Peace, if it may bee
Without the too much tainture of our honour:
Peace, and we'll buy it too.
At what price?
Tribute.
At all the charge of this war.
That will not do.
Leontius, you and I have served together,
And run through many a fortune with our swords,
Brothers in wounds, and health; one meat has fed us,
One tent a thousand times from cold night covered us:
Our loves have been but one; and had we died then,
One monument had held our names, and actions:
Why do you set upon your friends such prizes?
And sacrifice to giddy chance such Trophies?
Have we forgot to dye? or are our virtues
Less in afflictions constant, than our fortunes?
Ye are deceived old soldier.
I know your words,
And thus low bow in reverence to your virtues:
Were these my wars, or lead my power in chief here,
I knew then how to meet your memories:
They are my Kings employments; this man fights now,
To whom I owe all duty, faith, and service;
This man that sled before ye; call back that,
That bloody day again, call that disgrace home,
And then an easy peace, may sheath our swords up.
I am not greedy of your lives and fortunes,
Nor do I gape ungratefully to swallow ye,
Honour the spur of all illustrious natures,
That made you famous Soldiers, and next Kings,
And not ambitious envy strikes me forward,
Will ye unarme, and yield your selves his prisoners?
We never knew what that sound meant: no gives
Shall ever bind this body, but embraces;
Nor weight of sorrow here, till earth fall on me.
Expect our charge then.
It is the nobler courtesy:
And so we leave the hand of heaven to bless us.
Stay, have you any hope?
We have none left us,
But that one comfort of our deaths together;
Give us but room to sight.
Win it, and wear it.
Call from the hills those companies hang ore us
Like bursting clouds; and then break in, and take us.
Find such a Soldier will forsake advantage,
And we'll draw off, to show I dare be noble,
And hang a light out to ye in this darkness,
The light of peace; give up those Cities, forts,
And all those frontier Countries to our uses.
Is this the peace? traitors to those that feed us,
Our Gods and people? give our Countries from us?
Begin the knell, it sounds a great deal sweeter.
Let loose your servant death.
Fall fate upon us,
Our memories shall never stink behind us.
Seleucus, great Seleucus,
The Prince calls sir.
Thou stock of nobleness, and courtesy,
Thou father of the war —
What means the Prince now?
Give me my Standard here.
His angers melted.
You Gentlemen that were his prisoners,
And felt the bounty of that noble nature,
Lay all your hands, and bear these Colours to him,
The Standard of the Kingdom; take it soldier.
What will this mean?
Thou hast won it, bear it off,
And draw thy men home whilst we waite upon thee.
You shall have all our countries.
All by heaven sir.
I will not have a stone, a bush, a bramble,
No, in the way of courtesy, I'll start ye;
Draw off, and make a lane through all the Army,
That these that have subdued us, may march through us.
Sir, do not make me surfeit with such goodness,
I'll bear your Srandard for ye; follow ye.
I swear it shall be so, march through me fairly,
And thine be this days honour, great Seleucus.
Mirror of noble minds.
Nay then ye hate me.
I cannot speak now: 
Well, go thy ways, at a sure piece of bravery
Thou art the best, these men are won by the necks now:
I'll send a post away.
NO aptness in her?
Not an immodest motion,
And yet when she is as free, and when she is courted,
Makes as wild witty answers.
This more fires me,
I must not have her thus.
We cannot alter her.
Have ye put the youths upon her?
All that know any thing,
And have been studied how to catch a beauty,
But like so many whelps about an Elephant—
The Prince is coming home sir.
I hear that too,
But that's no matter; am I altered well;
Not to be known I think sir.
I must see her. 
I offered all I had, all I could think of,
I tried her through all the points of the compass, I think.
She studies to undo the Court, to plant here
The enemy to our age, chastity;
She is the first, that ere baked a close Arbour,
And the sweet contents within: She hates curled heads too,
And setting up or beards she swears, is Idolatry.
I never knew so fair a face so froze;
Yet she would make one think—
True by her carriage,
For she's as wanton as a kid to the out side,
As full of mocks and taunts: I kissed her hand too,
Walked with her half an hour.
She heard me sing,
And sung her self too; she sings admirably;
But still, when any hope was, as it is her trick
To minister enough of those, then presently
With some new slam or other, nothing to the matter,
And such a frown, as would sink all before her,
She takes her chamber; come we shall not be the last fools.
Not by a hundred I hope; it is a strange wench.
This screwes me up still higher. 
Here she comes sir.
Then be you gone: and take the women with ye,
And lay those Jewels in her way.
If I stay longer
I shall number as many lovers as Lais did;
How they slocke after me? upon my conscience,
I have had a dozen horses given me this morning,
I'll even set up a troop, and turn she-souldier.
A good discreet wench now, that were not hidebound
Might raise a fine estate here, and suddenly:
For these warm things will give their souls— I can go no where
Without a world of offerings to my excellence:
I am a Queen, a Goddess, I know not what—
And no constellation in all heaven, but I outshine it;
And they have found out now I have no eyes
Of mortal lights, but certain influences,
Strange virtuous lightnings, humane nature starts at,
And I can kill my twenty in a morning,
With as much case now—
Ha? what are these? new projects?
Where are my honourable Ladies? are you out too?
Nay then I must buy the stock, send me good carding:
I hope the Princes hand, be not in this sport;
I have not seen him yet, cannot hear from him,
And that, that, troubles me: all these were recreations
Had I but his sweet company to laugh with me:
What fellows that? another apparition?
This is the lovingst age: I should know that face,
Sure I have seen't before, not long since neither.
She sees me now: O heaven, a most rare creature!
Yes, it is the same: I will take no notice of ye,
But if I do not fit ye, let me fry for it;
Is all this Cackling for your eg? they are fair ones,
Excellent rich no doubt to; and may stumble
A good staid mind, but I can go thus by 'em;
My honest friend; do you set off these Jewels?
Set 'em off, Lady?
I mean, sell 'em here sir?
She's very quick; for sale they are not meant sure.
For sanctity I think much less: good even Sir.
Nay, noble Lady stay: it is you must wear 'em:
Never look strange, they are worthy your best beauty.
Did ye speak to me?
To you or to none living:
To you they are sent; to you they are sacrificed.
I'll never look a horse in the mouth that's given:
I thank ye sir: I'll send one to reward ye.
Do you never ask who sent 'em?
Never I:
Nor never care, if it be an honest end,
That end's the full reward, and thanks but slubbers it;
If it be ill, I will not urge the acquaintance.
This has a soul indeed: pray let me tell ye.
I care not if ye do, so you do it handsomely,
And not stand picking of your words,
The King sent 'em.
Away, away, thou art some foolish fellow,
And now I think thou hast stole 'em too; the king sent 'em?
Alas good man, would thou make me believe
He has nothing to do with things of these words,
But wantonly to fling 'em? he's an old man,
A good old man, they say too: I dare swear
Full many a year ago, he left these gambols:
Here, take your trinkets.
Sure I do not lye Lady.
I know thou lie extremely, damnably.
Thou hast a lying face.
I was never thus rattled.
But say I should believe: why are these sent me?
And why art thou the Messenger? who art thou?
Lady, look on 'em wisely, and then consider
Who can send such as these, but a King only?
And, to what beauty can they be oblations,
But only yours? For me that am the carrier,
It is only fit you know I am his servant,
And have fulfil'd his will.
You are short and pitthy;
What must my beauty do for these?
Sweet Lady,
You cannot be so hard of understanding,
When a Kings favour shines upon ye gloriously,
And speaks his love in these,—
O then love's the matter;
Sir-reverence love: now I begin to feel ye:
And I should be the Kings whore, a brave title.
And go as glorious as the Sun, ô brave still:
The chief Commandress of his Concubines,
Hurried from place to place to meet his pleasures.
A devilish subtle wench, but a rare spirit.
And when the good old sponge had sucked my youth dry,
And left some of his royal aches in my bones:
When time shalt tell me I have ploughed my life up,
And cast long furrows in my face to sink me.
You must not think so Lady.
Then can these sir,
These precious things, the price of youth and beauty;
This shop here of sin-offerings set me off again?
Can it restore me chaste, young innocent?
Purge me to what I was? add to my memory
An honest and a noble fame? The Kings device;
The sin's as universal as the Sun is,
And lights an everlasting torch to shame me.
Doe you hold so slight account of a great Kings favour,
That all knees bow to purchase?
Prithee peace:
If thou knew how ill-favouredly thy tale becomes thee,
And what ill root it takes—
You will be wiser.
Could the King find no shape to shift his pander into,
But reverend age? and one so like himself too?
She has found me out.
Cozen the world with gravity?
Prithee resolve me one thing, do's the King love thee?
I think he doe's.
It seems so by thy office:
He loves thy use, and when thats ended, hates thee:
Thou seem to me a soldier.
Yes I am one.
And hast fought for thy Country?
Many a time.
May be, commanded too?
I have done, Lady.
O wretched man, below the state of pity!
Can thou forget, thou were begot in honour?
A free companion for a King? a soldier?
Whose nobleness dare feel no want, but enemies?
Can thou forget this, and decline so wretchedly,
To eat the bread of bawdry, of base bawdry?
Feed on the scum of sin? fling thy sword from thee?
Dishonour to the noble name that nursed thee?
Go, beg diseases: let them be thy Armours,
Thy fights, the flames of lust, and their foul issues.
Why then I am a King, and mine own speaker.
And I as free as you, mine own disposer;
There take your jewels; let them give them lustres
That have dark lives and souls; wear 'em your self sir,
You'll seem a Devil else.
I command ye stay.
Be just, I am commanded.
I will not wrong ye.
Then thus low false my duty.
Can ye love me?
Say I, and all I have.
I cannot love ye;
Without the breach of faith I cannot hear ye;
Ye hang upon my love, like frosts on Lilies:
I can dye, but I cannot love: you are answered. 
I must find apter means, I love her truly. 
Hither doe you say she is come?
Yes sir, I am sure on it:
For whilst I waited on ye, putting my wife in trust,
I know not by what means, but the King found her,
And hither she was brought; how, or to what end.
My father found her?
So my wife informs me.
Leontius, pray draw off the soldiers,
I would a while be private.
Fall off Gentlemen,
The Prince would be alone. 
Is he so cunning?
There is some trick in this, and you must know it,
And be an agent too: which if it prove so —
Pull me to pieces sir?
My father found her?
My father brought her hither? went she willingly?
My wife says full of doubts.
I cannot blame her
No more: there's no trust, no faith in mankind.
Keep her up close, he must not come to see her:
You are welcome nobly now, welcome home gentlemen;
You have done a courteous service on the Enemy;
Has tied his faith for ever; you shall find it;
Ye are not now in's debt Son: still your sad looks:
Leontius, what's the matter?
Truth sir, I know not,
We have been merry since we went.
I feel it.
Come, what's the matter now? do you want money?
Sure he has heard of the wench.
Is that a want sir?
I would fine speak to your Grace.
You may doe freely.
And not deserve your anger?
That ye may too.
There was a gentle woman, and sometimes my prisoner,
Which I thought well of sir: your Grace conceives me.
I doe indeed, and with much grief conceive ye;
With full as much grief as your mother bare me:
There was such a woman: would I might as well say,
There was no such Demetrius.
She was virtuous,
And therefore not unfit my youth to love her:
She was as fair —
Her beauty I'll proclaim too,
To be as rich as ever reigned in woman;
But how she made that good, the Devil knows.
She was — O heaven!
The hell to all thy glories,
Swallowed thy youth, made shipwreck of thine honour:
She was a devil.
Ye are my father sir.
And since ye take a pride to show your follies,
I'll muster 'em, and all the world shall view 'em.
What heate is this? the Kings eyes speak his anger?
Thou hast abused thy youth; drawn to thy fellowship
In stead of arts and arms, a women's kisses,
The subtilties, and soft heats of a harlot.
Good sir, mistake her not.
A Witch, a Sorcerer:
I tell thee but the truth; and hear Demetrius,
Which has so dealt upon thy blood with charms,
Devilish and dark; so locked up all thy virtues;
So plucked thee back from what thou sprungst from, glorious
In heaven, that any tongue but his durst say this;
That any heart durst harbour it: Dread Father,
If for the innocent the gods allow us
To bend our knees —
Away, thou art bewitched still;
Though she be dead, her power still lives upon thee.
Dead? O sacred sir: dead did you say?
She is dead fool.
It is not possible: be not so angry,
Say she is fallen under your sad displeasure,
Or any thing but dead, say she is banished,
Invent a crime, and doe believe it sir.
Dead by the Law: we found her hell, and her,
I mean her charms and spells, for which she perished;
And she confessed she drew thee to thy ruin,
And purposed it, purposed my Empires overthrow.
But is she dead? was there no pity sir?
If her youth erred, was there no mercy shown her?
Did ye look on her face, when ye condemned her?
I looked into her heart, and there she was hideous.
Can she be dead? can virtue fall untimely?
She is dead, deservingly she died.
I have done then.
O matchless sweetness, whether art thou vanished?
O thou fair soul of all thy sex, what Paradise
Hast thou enriched and blessed? I am your son sir,
And to all you shall command stand most obedient,
Only a little time I must entreat you
To study to forget her; twill not belong sir,
Nor I long after it: art thou dead Celia,
Dead my poor wench? my joy, plucked green with violence:
O fair sweet flower, farewell: Come, thou destroyer,
Sorrow, thou melter of the soul, dwell with me;
Dwell with me solitary thoughts, tears, cryings,
Nothing that loves the day, love me, or seek me,
Nothing that loves his own life haunt about me:
And Love, I charge thee, never charm mine eyes more,
Nor ne'er betray a beauty to my curses:
For I shall curse all now hate all, forswear all,
And all the brood of fruitful nature vex at,
For she is gon that was all, and I nothing — 
This opinion must be maintained.
It shall be sir.
Let him go: I can at mine own pleasure
Draw him to'th' right again: wait you instructions,
And see the soldier paid, Leontius:
Once more ye are welcome home all.
Health to your Majesty. — 
Thou went along the journey, how can thou tell?
I did, but I am sure it is so: had I staid behind,
I think this had not proved.
A wench the reason?
Who's that talks of a wench there?
All this discontent
About a wench.
Where is this wench, good Colonel?
Prithee hold thy peace: who calls thee to counsel?
Why, if there be a wench —
It is fit thou know her: 
That I'll say for thee, and as fit thou art for her,
Let her be mewed or stopped: how is it Gentlemen?
Hoe's wondrous discontent, he will speak to no man.
Has taken his chamber close, admits no entrance;
Tears in his eyes, and cryings out.
It is so sir,
And now I wish my self half hanged ere I went this journey,
What is this woman?
I.
I cannot tell ye,
But handsome as heaven.
She is not so high I hope sir.
Where is she?
I, that would be known.
Why sirrah.
I cannot show ye neither;
The King has now disposed of her.
There lies the matter:
Will he admit none to come to comfort him?
Not any near, nor let 'em knock their hearts out,
Will never speak.
It is the best way if he have her;
For look you, a man would be loath to be disturbed in's pastime;
It is every good mans case.
It is all thy living,
We must not suffer this, we dare not suffer it:
For when these tender souls meet deep afflictions,
They are not strong enough to struggle with 'em,
But drop away as snow does, from a mountain,
And in the torrent of their own sighs sink themselves:
I will, and must speak to him.
So must I too:
He promised me a charge.
Of what? of children
Upon my conscience, thou hast a double company,
And all of thine own begetting already.
Thats all one,
I'll raise 'em to a Regiment, and there command 'em,
When they turn disobedient, unbeget 'em:
Knock 'em of the head, and put in new.
A rare way;
But for all this, thou art not valiant enough
To dare to see the Prince now?
Do ye think he's angry?
Extremely vexed.
to the endangering of any man comes near him.
Yet, if thou could but win him out,
What ere thy suite were.
Believe it granted presently.
Yet thou must think though,
That in the doing he may break upon ye,
And —
If he do not kill me.
There's the question.
For half a dozen hurts?
Art thou so valiant?
Not absolutely so neither: no it cannot be,
I want my impostumes, and my things about me,
Yet I'll make danger, Colonel.
Twill be rare sport,
How ere it take; give me thy hand; if thou dost this,
I'll raise thee up a horse troop, take my word for it.
What may be done by humane man?
Lets go then.
Away before the cool: he will revenge else. 
Will she not yield?
For all we can urge to her;
I swore I would marry her, she laughed extremely,
And then she railed like thunder.
Call in the Magician. 
I must, and will obtain her, I am ashes else.
Are all the Philters in? charms, powders, roots?
They are all in: and now I only stay
The invocation of some helping spirits.
To your work then, and dispatch.
Sit still, and fear not.
I shall ne'er endure these fights.
Away with the woman: go wait without.
When the Devils gone pray call me. 
Be sure you make it powerful enough.
Pray doubt not.—He Conjures.
RIse from the shades below,
All you that prove
The helps of loose Love;
Rise and bestow
Upon this Cup, what ever may compel
By powerful Charm, and un-resisted Spell.
A heart un-warm'd to melt in Loves desires,
Distill into this Liquor all your fires;
Heats, longings, tears,
But keep back frozen fears,
That she may know, that has all power defied,
Art is a power that will not be denied.
I Obey, I obey,
And am come to view ever day
Brought along, all may compel,
All the earth has, and one hell:
Here's a little little Flower.
This will make her sweat an hour,
Then unto such flames arise,
A thousand joys will not suffice.
Here's the powder of the Moon
With which she caught Endymion,
The powerful tears that Venus cried,
When the Boy Atones dyed.
Here's Medeas Charm, with which
Jasons heart she did bewitch,
Omphale this Spell put in
When she made the Lybian spin.
This dull root plucked from Lethe stood,
Purges all pure thoughts, and good.
These I stir thus, round, round, round,
Whilst our light feet beat the ground.
Now sir it is full, and whosoever drinks this
Shall violently dote upon your person,
And never sleep nor eat unsatisfied:
So many hours twill work, and work with violence,
And those expired it is done. You have my art sir.
See him rewarded liberally—Leucippe.
Here, take this bowl, and when she calls for wine next—
Be sure you give her this, and see her drink it;
Delay no time when she calls next.
I shall sir.
Let none else touch it on your life.
I am charged sir.
Now if she have an antidote art let her scope me.
There's the door Lieutenant, if you dare do any thing.
Here's no man waits.
He has given a charge that none shall,
Nor none shall come within the hearing of him:
Dare ye go forward?
Let me put on my skull first.
My head's almost beaten into th'pap of an Apple.
Are there no Guns in the door?
The rogue will doe it,
And yet I know he has no stomach to it.
What loope-holes are there when I knock for stones,
For those may pepper me? I can perceeive none.
How he views the Fortification.
Farewell Gentlemen,
If I be killed —
We'll see thee buried bravely.
Away: how should I know that then? Isle knock softly.
Pray heaven he speak in a low voice now to comfort me:
I feel I have no heart to it: —Is it well, Gentlemen.
Colonel, my Troop—
A little louder.
Stay, stay;
Here is a window, I will see, stand wide.
By — he's charging of a Gun:
There's no such matter.
There's no body in this room.
O'twas a fire-shovell:
Now isle knock louder: if he say who's there,
As sure he has so much manners, then will I answer him 
So finely &amp; demurely: my Troop Colonel—
Knock louder fool, he hears not.
You fool, doe you.
Doe and ye dare now.
I doe not undertake it.
Then hold your peace, &amp; meddle with your own matters.
Now he will knock. 
Sir, sir: will it please you hear sir?
Your Grace: Isle look again: what's that?
He's there now.
Lord! How he stares! I ne'er yet saw him thus altered:
Stand now, and take the Troop.
Would I were in it,
And a good horse under me: I must knock again.
The devil's at my fingers ends: he comes now.
Now Colonel, if I live—
The Troop's thine own Boy. 
What desperate fool, ambitious of his ruin?
Your father would desire ye, sit, to come to dinner.
Thou art no more,
Now, now, now, now.
Poor coxcomb,
Why doe I aim at thee? 
His fear has killed him. 
I protest hoe's almost stiff: bend him, and rub him:
Hold his nose close, you, if you be a woman,
Help us a little: here's a man near perished.
Alas, alas, I have nothing here about me.
Look to my bowl: Isle run in presently
And fetch some waters: bend him, and set him upwards.
A goodly man.—
Here's a brave heart: he's warm again: you shall not
Leave us in the lurch so, sirrah.
Now he breathes too.
If we had but any drink to raise his spirits.
What's that in the bowl? upon my life good Liquor,
She would not own it else.
He sees.
Look up boy,
And take this cup, and drink it off, I'll pledge thee,
Guide it to his mouth: he swallows heartily.
Oh! fear and sorrows dry; it is off—
Stand up man.
Am I not shot?
Away with him, and cheer him:
Thou hast won thy Troop.
I think I won it bravely.
Go, I must see the Prince, he must not live thus;
And let me hear an hour hence from ye.
Well sir — 
Here, here: whore's the sick Gentleman?
Hoe's up and gone, Lady.
Alas: that I came so late.
He must still thank ye,
Ye left that in a cup here did him comfort.
That in the bowl?
Yes truly, very much comfort,
He drank it off, and after it spoke lustily.
Did he drink it all?
All off.
The devil choke him,
I am undone: 'has twenty devils in him,
Undone for ever: left he none?
I think not.
No not a drop: what shall become of me now?
Had he no where else to swooned? a veng'ance swooned him:
Undone, undone, undone: stay, I can lye yet,
And swear too at a pinch, thats all my comfort, 
Look to him; I say look to him, &amp; but mark what folows. 
What a devil ails the woman? here comes the Prince again,
With such a sadness on his face, as sorrow,
Sorrow her self, but poorly imitates.
Sorrow of sorrows on that heart that cause it.
Why might she not be false &amp; treacherous to me?
And found so by my father? she was a woman,
And many a one of that sex, young and fair,
As full of faith as she have fallen, and foully.
It is a wench: O that I knew the circumstance.
Why might not, to preserve me from this ruin,
She having lost her honour, and abused me,
My father chance the forms of the coins, and execute
His anger on a fault she ne'er committed,
Only to keep me safe? why should I think so?
She never was to me but all obedience,
Sweetness, and love.
How heartily he weeps now?
I have not wept these thirty years and upward;
But now, if I should be hanged I cannot hold from it;
It grieves me to the heart.
Who's that that mocks me?
A plague of him that mocks ye: I grieve truly,
Truly and heartily to see you thus sir:
And if it lay in my power, Gods are my witness,
Who ere he be, that took your sweet peace from ye;
I am not so old yet, nor want I spirit—
No more of that no more Leontius,
Revenges are the gods: our part is sufferance:
Farewell, I shall not see thee long.
Good sir, tell me the cause, I know there is a woman in it;
Doe you hold me faithful? dare ye trust your soldier?
Sweet Prince, the cause?
I must not, dare not tell it,
And as thou art an honest man, enquire not.
Will ye be merry then?
I am wondrous merry.
It is wondrous well: you think now this becomes ye.
Shame on it, it does not sir, it shows not handsomely;
If I were thus, you would swear I were an ass straight;
A wooden ass; whine for a wench?
Prithee leave me.
I will not leave ye for a sit.
Leontius?
For that you may have any where for sixepence,
And a dear pennyworth too.
Nay, then you are troublesome.
Not half so troublesome as you are to your self sir;
Was that brave heart made to pant for a placket:
And now in the dog-daies too, when nothing dare love?
That noble mind to melt away, and molder
For a hay-nonny-nonny? would I had a glass here,
To show ye what a pretty toy ye are turned to.
My wretched fortune.
Will ye but let me know her?
I'll once turn bawd: go too, they are good men's offices,
And not so contemptible as we take 'em for:
And if she be above ground, and a woman,
I ask no more; I'll bring her of my back sir,
By this hand I will: and I had as lieve bring the devil,
I care not who she be, nor where I have her,
And in your arms, or the next bed deliver her,
Which you think fittest: and when you have danced your galliard.
Away, and fool to them are so affected:
O thou art gone, and all my comfort with thee;
Wilt thou do one thing for me?
All things in the world sir,
Of all dangers.
Swear.
I will.
Come near me no more then.
How?
Come no more near me:
Thou art a plague-sore to me. 
Give you good even sir;
If you be suffered thus, we shall have fine sport.
I will be sorry yet. 
How now, how does he?
Nay, if I tell ye hang me, or any man else
That hath his nineteen wits; he has the bots I think,
He groans, and roars, and kicks.
Will be speak yet?
Not willingly:
Shortly he will not see a man; if ever
I looked upon a Prince so metamorphis'd,
So juggled into I know not what, shame take me;
This it is to be in love.
Is that the cause on it?
What is it not the cause of but bear baitings?
And yet it stinks much like it: out upon it,
What Giants, and what dwarffs, what owls and apes,
What dogs, and cats it makes us? men that are possessed with it,
Live as if they had a legion of devils in 'em,
And every devil of a several nature,
Nothing but Hey pass, re-passe: whore's the Lieutenant?
Has he gathered up the end on's wits again?
He is alive: but you that talk of wonders,
Show me but such a wonder as he is now.
Why? he was ever at the worst a wonder.
He is now most wonderful; a blazer now sir:
What ails the fools? and what star reigns now gentlemen
We have such prodigies?
Twill poise your heaven-hunters;
He talks now of the King, no other language,
And with the King, as he imagines hourly,
Courts the King, drinks to the King, dies for the King,
Buys all the pictures of the King, wears the Kings colours,
Does he not lye in the Kings street too?
Hoe's going thither,
Makes prayers for the King in sundry languages,
Turns all his Proclamations into meeter,
Is really in love with the King, most dotingly,
And swears Atones was a devil to him:
A sweet King, a most comely King, and such a King —
Then down on's mary-bones: O excellent King:
Thus he begins, Thou light and life of creatures,
Angell-ey'd King, vouchsafe at length thy favour;
And so proceeds to incision: what think ye of this sorrow?
Will as familiarly kiss the Kings horses
As they pass by him: ready to ravish his footmen.
Why this is above Ela?
But how comes this?
Nay thats to understand yet,
But thus it is, and this part but the poorest,
It would make a man leap over the Moon to see him act these.
With sighs as though his heart would break:
Cry like a breached boy, not eat a bit.
I must go see him presently,
For this is such a gig: for certain Gentlemen
The Fiend rides on a Fiddlestick.
I think so.
Can ye guide me to him? for half an hour I am his,
To see the miracle.
We sure shall start him. 
Are you sure she drank it?
Now must I lye most confidently.
Yes sir, she has drunk it off.
How works it with her?
I see no alteration yet.
There will be,
For he is the greatest Artist living made it;
Where is she now?
She is ready to walk out sir.
Stark mad, I know she will be.
So I hope sir.
She knows not of the Prince?
Of no man living—
How do I look! how do my clothes become me?
I am not very gray.
A very youth sir,
Upon my maiden-head as smug as April:
Heaven bless that sweet face, twill undo a thousand,
Many a soft heart must sob yet, ere that wither,
Your Grace can give content enough. 
I think so.
Here she comes sir.
How shall I keep her off me?
Go &amp; perfume the room: make all things ready. 
No hope yet of the Prince? no comfort of him?
They keep me mewed up here, as they mew mad folks,
No company but my afflictions.
This royal devil again? strange, how he haunts me?
How like a poisoned potion his eyes fright me?
Has made himself handsome too.
Doe you look now, Lady?
You will leap anon.
Curled and perfumed? I smell him:
He looks on's legs too: sure he will cut a caper,
God-a-mercie dear December.
O doe you smile now:
I knew it would work with you: come hither pretty one.
Sir.
I like those courtesies well come hither &amp; kiss me.
I am reading sir of a short Treatise here,
Thats called the vanity of lust: has your Grace seen it?
He says here, that an old mans loose desire
Is like the glow-wormes light, the Apes so wondered at:
Which when they gathered sticks, and laid upon it,
And blew, and blew, turned tail, and went out presently:
And in another place, he calls their loves,
Faint smells of dying flowers, carry no comforts;
They are doting stinking fogs, so thick and muddy,
Reason with all his beams cannot beat through 'em.
How's this? is this the potion? you but fool still,
I know you love me.
As ye are just and honest,
I know I love and honour ye: admire ye.
This makes against me, fearfully against me.
But as you bring your power to persecute me,
Your traps to catch mine innocence, to rob me,
As you lay out your lusts to overwhelm me,
Hell never hated good, as I hate you sir;
And I dare tell it to your face: What glory
Now after all your Conquests got, your Titles,
The ever-living memories rass'd to you.
Can my defeat be? my poor wrack, what triumph?
And when you crown your swelling cups to fortune,
What honourable tongue can sing my story?
Be as your Emblem is, a glorious Lamp
Set on the top of all, to light all perfectly:
Be as your office is, a god like Justice,
Into all shedding equally your virtues.
She has drenched me now: now I admire his goodness;
So young, so nobly strong, I never tasted:
Can nothing in the power of Kings persuade ye?
No, nor that power command me.
Say I should force ye?
I have it in my will.
Your will's a poor one;
And though it be a Kings will, a despised one,
Weaker then Infants legs, your will's in swaddling clouts:
A thousand ways my will has found to check ye;
A thousand doors to leap ye I dare die sir
As suddenly I dare die, as you can offer:
Nay, say you had your will, say you had ravished me,
Performed your lust, what had you purchased by it?
What honour won, doe you know who dwells above sir,
And what they have prepared for men turned devils?
Did you never hear their thunder? start and tremble,
Death sitting on your blood, when their fires visit us?
Will nothing wring you then do you think? sit hard here?
And like a snail curl round about your conscience
Biting and stinging: will you not roar too late then?
Then when you shake in horror of this villainy,
Then will I rise a star in heaven, and scorn ye.
Lust, how I hate thee now? and love this sweetness?
Will ye be my Queen? can that price purchase ye?
Not all the world, I am a Queen already;
Crowned by his love, I must not lose for fortune;
I can give none away, sell none away sir,
Can lend no love, am not mine own Exchequer;
For in another heart my hope and peace lies.
Your fair hands, Lady: for yet I am not pure enough
To touch these lips, in that sweet peace ye spoke of:
Live now for ever, and I to serve your virtues —
Why now ye show a god? now I kneel to ye;
This sacrifice of Virgins joy send to ye:
Thus I hold up my hands to heaven that touched ye,
And pray eternal blessings dwell about ye.
Virtue commands the stars: rise more then virtue;
Your present comfort shall be now my business.
All my obedient service wait upon ye. 
Hast thou clean forgot the wars?
Prithee hold thy peace.
His mind's much elevated now.
It serves so
Sirrah.
I am so troubled with this fellow.
He will call me rogue anon.
Tic ten to one else.
O King, that thou knew I loved thee, how I loved thee:
And where O King I barrel up thy beauty.
He cannot leave his Sutlers trade, he woos in it.
O never King.
By this hand, when I consider —
My honest friend, you are a little saucy.
I told you you would have it.
When mine own worth —
Is flung into the balance, and found nothing.
And yet a soldier.
And yet a saucy one.
One that has followed thee.
Fair and far off.
Fought for thy grace.
It was for some grief, you lye Sir.
Hoe's the son of a whore denies this: will that satisfy ye?
Yes, very well.
Shall then that thing that honours thee?
How miserable a thing soever, yet a thing still;
And though a thing of nothing, thy thing ever.
Heere's a new thing.
Hoe's in a deep dump now.
I'll fetch him out on it. When's the Kings birth-day
When ere it be, that day I'll dye with ringing,
And there's the resolution of a Lover. 
A goodly resolution sure I take it,
He is bewitched, or moop'd, or his brains melted,
Could he find no body to fall in love with; but the King,
The good old King, to dote upon him too?
Stay, now I remember what the fat woman warned me,
Bad me remember and look to him too:
Isle hang if she have not a hand in this: hoe's conjured,
Go after him. I pity the poor rascal,
In the mean time Isle wait occasion
To work upon the Prince.
Pray doe that seriously. 
Hoe's very ill.
I am very sorry for it,
And much ashamed I have wronged his innocence,
Menippus, guide her to the Princes lodgings,
There leave her to his love again.
I am glad sir.
He will speak to none.
O I shall break that silence;
Be quick, take fair attendance.
Yes sir presently. 
He will find his tongue, I warrant ye; his health too;
I send a physic will not fail.
Fair work it.
We hear the Princes mean to visit us
In way of truce.
Tic thought so.
Come: lets in then,
And think upon the noblest ways to meet 'em. 
There's no way now to get in: all the lights stopped too;
Nor can I hear a sound of him: pray heaven
He use no violence: I think he has more soul
Stronger, and I hope nobler: would I could but see once
This beauty he groans under, or come to know
But any circumstance. What noise is that there?
I think I heard him groan: here are some coming;
A woman too, Isle stand aloof, and view 'em.
Well, some of ye have been too blame in this point,
But I forgive ye: The King might have picked out too
Some fitter woman to have tried his valour.
It was all to the best meant, Lady.
I must think so,
For how to mend it now: hoe's here you tell me?
Hoe's Madam, and the joy to see you only
Will draw him out.
I know that women's tongue,
I think I have seen her face too: Isle go nearer:
If this be she, he has some cause of sorrow:
It is the same face; the same, most excellent woman.
This should be Lord Leontius: I remember him.
Lady, I think ye know me.
Speak soft, good soldier:
I do, and know ye worthy, know ye noble;
Know not me yet openly, as you love me;
But let me see ye again, Isle satisfy ye:
I am wondrous glad to see those eyes.
You have charged me.
You shall know where I am.
I will not off yet:
She goes to knock it's door: This must be she
The fellow told me of: right glad I am on it,
He will bolt now for certain.
Are ye within sir?
Isle trouble you no more: I thank your courtesy,
Pray leave me now.
We rest your humble servants. 
So now my gives are off: pray heaven he be here!
Master, my royal sir: doe you hear who calls ye?
Love my Demetrius.
These are pretty quaile-pipes,
The Cork will come anon.
Can ye be drowsy,
When I call at your window?
I hear him stirring: 
Now he comes wondering out.
Tic Gelias sound sure:
The sweetness of that tongue draws all hearts to it;
There stands the shape too.
How he stares upon her?
Ha? do mine eyes abuse me?
It is she, the living Celia: your hand Lady?
What should this mean?
The very self same Celia.
How do ye sir?
Only turned brave.
I heard you were dead my dear on: complete,
She is wondrous brave, a wondrous gallant Courtier.
How he surveys me round? here has been foul play.
How came she thus?
It was a kind of death sir,
I suffered in your absence, moved up here,
And kept concealed I know not how.
It is likely:
How came you hither Celia? wondrous gallant:
Did my father send for ye?
So they told me Sir,
And one command too.
I hope you were obedient?
I was so ever.
And ye were bravely used?
I wanted nothing:
My maiden-head to a more in the Sun, he's jealous:
I must now play the knave with him, to dye for it,
It is in me nature.
Her very eyes are altered:
Jewels, and rich ones too, I never saw yet—
And what were those came for ye?
Monstrous jealous:
Have I lived at the rate of these scorned questions?
They seemed of good sort Gentlemen.
Kind men?
They were wondrous kind:
I was much beholding to 'em;
There was one Menippus sir.
Ha?
One Menippus,
A notable merry Lord, and a good companion.
And one Charinthus too?
Yes, there was such a one.
And Timon?
It is most true.
And thou most treacherous:
My fathers bawds by—they never miss course;
And were these daily with ye?
Every hour sir.
And was there not a Lady, a fat Lady?
O Yes; a notable good wench:
The devil fetch her.
It is even the merriest wench—
Did she keep with ye too?
She was all in all; my bedfellow, eat with me,
Brought me acquainted.
You are well known here then?
There is no living here a stranger I think.
How came ye by this brave gown?
This is a poor one:
Alas, I have twenty richer: do you see these jewels?
Why, they are the poorest things, to those are sent me,
And sent me hourly too.
Is there no modesty?
No faith in this fair Sex?
What will this prove too?
For yet with all my wits, I understand not.
Come hither; thou art dead indeed, lost, tainted;
All that I left thee fair, and innocent,
Sweet as thy youth, and carrying comfort in it;
All that I hoped for virtuous, is fled from thee,
Turnd' back, and banckrupt.
By'r Lady, this cuts shrewdly.
Thou art dead, for ever dead; sins surfeit slew thee;
The ambition of those wanton eyes betrayed thee;
Go from me grave of honour; go thou foul one,
Thou glory of thy sin; go thou despised one,
And where there is no virtue, nor no virgin;
Where Chastity was never known, nor heard of;
Where nothing reigns but imperious lust, and losers faces
Go thither, child of blood, and sing my doting.
You do not speak this seriously I hope sir;
I did but jest with you.
Look not upon me,
There is more hell in those eyes, then hell harbours;
And when they flame, more torments.
Dare ye trust me?
You durst once even with all you had: you love sir?
By this fair light I am honest.
Thou subtle Circes,
Cast not upon the maiden light eclipses:
Curse not the day.
Come, come, you shall not do this:
How fine you would seem angry now, to fright me;
You are not in the field among your enemies;
Come, I must cool this courage.
Out thou impudence,
Thou ulcer of thy Sex; when I first saw thee,
I drew into mine eyes mine own destruction,
I pulled into my heart that sudden poison,
That now consumes my dear content to sinders:
I am not now Demetrius, thou hast changed me;
Thou woman with thy thousand wiles hast changed me;
Thou Serpent with thy angell-eyes hast slain me;
And where, before I touched on this fair ruin,
I was a man, and reason made, and moved me,
Now one great lump of grief. I grow and wander.
And as you are noble, do you think I did this?
Put all the devils wings on, and fly from me.
I will go from ye, never more to see ye:
I will fly from ye, as a plague hangs o'er me;
And through the progress of my life hereafter;
Where ever I shall find a fool, a false man,
One that ne'er knew the worth of polished virtue;
A base suspecter of a virgins honour,
A child that flings away the wealth he cried for,
Him will I call Demetrius: that fool Demetrius,
That mad man a Demetrius; and that false man,
The Prince of broken faiths, even Prince Demetrius.
You think now, I should cry, and kneel down to ye,
Petition for my peace; let those that feel here
The weight of evil, waite for such a favour,
I am above your hate, as far above it,
In all the actions of an innocent life,
As the pure Stars are from the muddy meators:
Cry when you know you folly: howl and curse then,
Beat that unmanly breast, that holds a false heart
When ye shall come to know, whom ye have flung from ye.
Pray ye stay a little.
Not your hopes can alter me,
Then let a thousand back thoughts muster in ye,
And with those enter in a thousand doatings;
Those eyes be never shut, but drop to nothing:
My innocence for ever haunt and fright ye:
Those arms together grow in folds; that tongue,
That bold bad tongue that barks out these disgraces.
When you shall come to know how nobly virtuous
I have preserved my life, rot, rot within ye.
What shall I doe?
Live a lost man for ever.
Go ask your fathers conscience what I suffered,
And through what seas of hazards I sayl'd through:
Mine honour still advanced in spite of tempests,
Then take your leave of love; and confess freely,
You were never worthy of this heart that served ye,
And so farewell ungrateful—
Is she gone?
Isle follow her, and will find out this matter. - 
Are ye pleased now? have you got your heart again?
Have I restored ye that?
Sir: even for heavens sake,
And sacred truth sake, tell me how ye found her.
I will, and in few words. Before I tried her,
It is true, I thought her most unfit your fellowship,
And feared her too: which fear begot that story
I told ye first: but since, like gold I touched her.
And how dear sir?
Heavens holy light's not purer:
The constancy and goodness of all women
That ever lived, to win the names of worthy,
This noble Maid has doubled in her: honour,
All promises of wealth, all art to win her,
And by all tongues employed, wrought as much on her
As one may doe upon the Sun at noon day
By lighting Candles up: her shape is heavenly,
And to that heavenly shape her thoughts are angels.
Why did you tell me sir?
It is true, I erred in it:
But since I made a full proof of her virtue,
I find a King too poor a servant for her.
Love her, and honour her; in all observe her.
She must be something more then time yet tells her:
And certain I believe him blessed, enjoys her:
I would not lose the hope of such a daughter,
To add another Empire to my honour. — 
O wretched state! to what end shall I turn me?
And where begins my penance? now, what service
Will win her love again? my death must doe it:
And if that sacrifice can purge my follies,
Be pleased, O mighty Love, I dye thy servant—
I Know he do's not deserve ye; he has used ye poorly:
And to redeem himself—
Redeem?
I know it—
There's no way left:
For heavens sake doe not name him.
Doe not think on him sir, he's so far from me
In all my thoughts now, methinkes I never knew him.
But yet I would see him again.
No, never, never.
I doe not mean to lend him any comfort;
But to afflict: him, so to torture him;
That even his very soul may shake within him:
To make him know, though he be great and powerful,
It is not within his aim to deal dishonourably,
And carry it off, and with a maid of your sort.
I most confess, I could most spitefully afflict him;
Now, now, I could whet my anger at him;
Now, armed with bitterness, I could shoot through him;
I long to vex him:
And doe it home, and bravely:
Were I a man?
Isle help that weakness in ye:
I honour ye, and serve ye.
Not only to disclaim me,
When he had sealed his vows in heaven, sworn to me,
And poor believing I became his servant:
But most maliciously to brand my credit,
Stain my pure name.
I would not suffer it:
See him I would again, and to his teeth too:
Od's precious, I would ring him such a lesson—
I have done that already.
Nothing, nothing:
It was too poor a purge; besides, by this time
He has found his fault, and feels the hells that follow it.
That, and your urged on anger to the highest.
Why, twill be such a stroke—
Say he repent then,
And seek with tears to soften, I am a woman;
A woman that have loved him, sir, have honoured him:
I am no more.
Why, you may deal thereafter.
If I forgive him, I am lost.
Hold there then,
The sport will be to what a poor submission —
But keep you strong.
I would not see him.
Yes,
You shall ring his knell:
How if I kill him?
Kill him: why, let him dye.
I know it is fit so.
But why should I that loved him once, destroy him?
O had he escaped this sin, what a brave Gentleman—
I must confess, had this not fallen, a nobler,
A handsomer, the whole world had not showed ye:
And to his making such a mind.
It is certain:
But all this I must now forget.
You shall not
If I have any art: go up sweet Lady,
And trust my truth.
But good sir bring him not.
I would not for the honour ye are born too,
But you shall see him, and neglect him too, and scorn him.
You will be near me then.
I will be with ye;
Yet ther's some hope to stop this gap, isle work hard. 
But is it possible this fellow took it?
It seems so by the violence it wrougkt with,
Yet now the fits even off.
I beseech your Grace.
Nay, I forgive thy wife with all my heart,
And am right glad she drank it not her self,
And more glad that the virtuous maid escaped it,
I would not for the world 'thad hit: but that this Soldier,
Lord how he looks, that he should take this vomit;
Can he make rimes too?
'Has made a thousand sir,
And plays the burden to 'em on a Jewes-trump.
He looks as though he were bepist: do you love me sir?
Yes surely even with all my heart.
I thank ye;
I am glad I have so good a subject: but pray ye tell me,
How much did ye love me, before ye drank this matter?
Even as much as a sober man might; &amp; a Soldier
That your Grace owes just half a years pay to.
Well remembered;
And did I seem so young and amiable to ye?
Methought you were the sweetest youth —
That's excellent.
I truly sir; and ever as I thought on ye,
I wished, and wished—
What did thou wish I prithee?
Even, that I had been a wench of fifteen for ye,
A handsome wench sir.
Why? God a mercy Soldier:
I seem not so now to thee.
Not all out:
And yet I have a grudging to your Grace still.
Thou wast never in love before?
Not with a King,
And hope I shall never be again: Truly sir,
I have had such plundges, and such bickrings,
And as it were such runnings atilt within me,
For whatsoever it was provoked me toward ye.
God-a-mercy still.
I had it with a vengeance,
It plaid his prize.
I would not have been a wench then,
Though of this age.
No sure, I should have spoiled ye.
Well, go thy ways, of all the lusty lovers
That ere I saw — wilt have an other potion?
If you will be another thing, have at ye.
Ha, ha, ha: give me thy hand, from henceforth thou art my soldier,
Do bravely, Isle love thee as much.
I thank ye;
But if you were mine enemy, I would not wish it ye:
I beseech your Grace, pay me my charge.
Thats certain sir;
Has bought up all that ere he found was like ye,
Or any thing you have loved, that he could purchase;
Old horses, that your Grace has ridden blind, &amp; foundee'd;
Dogs, rosten hawks, and which is more then all this,
Has worn your Graces Gauntlet in his Bonnet.
Bring in your Bills: mine own love shall be satisfied;
And sirrah, for this potion you have taken,
Isle point ye out a portion ye shall live on.
It was the best draught that ere ye drunk.
I hope so.
Are the Princes come to'th' Court?
They are all, and lodged sir.
Come then, make ready for their entertainment,
Which presently we'll give: wait you on me sir.
I shall love drink the better whilst I live boys. 
Let me but see her dear Leontius;
Let me but dye before her.
Would that would doe it:
If I knew where she lay now, with what honesty,
You having flung so maine a mischief on her,
And on so innocent and sweet a Beauty,
Dare I present your visit?
Isle repent all:
And with the greatest sacrifice of sorrow
That ever Lover made.
Twill be too late sir:
I know not what will become of you.
You can help me.
It may be to her sight: what are you nearer;
She has sworn she will not speak to ye, look upon ye,
And to love ye again, O she cries out, and thunders,
She had rather love — there is no hope —
Yes Leontius,
There is a hope, which though it draw no love to it,
At least will draw her to lament my fortune,
And that hope shall relieve me.
Hark ye sir, hark ye:
Say I should bring ye —
Do not trifle with me?
I will not trifle; both together bring ye,
You know the wrongs ye' done.
I do confess 'em.
And if you should then jump into your fury,
And have another querke in your head.
I'll dye first.
You must say nothing to her; for it is certain,
The nature of your crime will admit no excuse.
I will not speak, mine eyes shall tell my penance.
You must look wondrous sad too.
I need not look so,
I am truly sadness self.
That look will do it:
Stay here, I'll bring her to you instantly:
But take heed how you bear your self: sit down there,
The more humble you are, the more she'll take compassion
Women are per'lous things to deal upon. 
What shall become of me? to curse my fortune,
Were but to curse my father; that's too impious;
But under whatsoever fate I suffer,
Bless I beseech thee heaven her harmless goodness.
Now arm your self.
You have not brought him?
Yes faith,
And there he is: you see in what poor plight too,
Now you may doe your will, kill him, or save him.
I will go back.
I will be hanged then Lady,
Are ye a coward now?
I cannot speak to him.
O me.
There was a sigh to blow a Church down;
So, now their eyes are fixed, the small shot plays,
They will come to the battery anon.
He weeps extremely.
Rail at him now.
I dare not.
I am glad on it.
Nor dare believe his tears.
You may blessed beauty,
For those thick streams that troubled my repentance,
Are crept out long ago.
You see how he looks.
What have I to doe how he looks? how looked he then,
When with a poisoned truth he bit mine honour,
It was your counsel too, to scorn and slight him.
I, if ye saw fit cause; and you confessed too,
Except this sin, he was the bravest gentleman,
The sweetest, noblest: I take nothing from ye,
Nor from your anger; use him as you please:
For to say truth, he had deserved your justice;
But still consider what he has been to you.
Pray doe not blind me thus.
O gentle Mistress,
If there were any way to expiate
A sin so great as mine, by intercession,
By prayers, by daily tears, by dying for ye:
O what a joy would close these eyes that love ye.
They say women have tender hearts, I know not,
I am sure mine melts.
Sir, I forgive ye heartily,
And all your wrong to me I cast behind me,
And wish ye a fit beauty to your virtues:
Mine is too poor, in peace I part thus from you;
I must look back: gods keep your Grace: he's here still. 
She has forgiven me.
She has directed ye:
Up, up, and follow like a man: away sir,
She looked behind her twice: her heart dwells here sir,
Ye drew tears from her too: she cannot freeze thus;
The doore's set open too, are ye a man?
Are ye alive? doe ye understand her meaning?
Have ye blood and spirit in ye?
I dare not trouble her.
Nay, and you will be nipped in the head with nothing,
Walk whining up and down; I dare not, I cannot:
Strike now or never: faint heart, you know what sir—
Be governed by your fear, and quench your fire out.
A devil on it stands this door op for nothing:
So get ye together, and be nought: now to secure all,
Will I go fetch out a more sovereign plaster. 
This peace is fairly made.
Would your Grace wish us
To put in more: take what you please, we yield it;
The honour done us by your son constrains it,
Your noble son.
It is sufficient, Princes;
And now we are one again, one mind, one body,
And one sword shall strike for us.
Let Prince Demetrius
But lead us on: for we are his vowed servants;
Against the strength of all the world we'll buckle.
And even from all that strength we'll catch at victory.
O had I now recovered but the fortune
I lost in Antioch, when mine Uncle perished;
But that were but to surfeit me with blessings.
You lost a sweet child there.
Name it no more sir;
This is no time to entertain such sorrows;
Will your Majesty do us the honour, we may see the Prince,
And wait upon him? 
I wonder he stays from us:
How now Leontius, whore's my son?
Brave Captain.
Old valiant sir.
Your Graces are welcome:
Your son and't please you sir, is new cashiered yonder,
Cast from his Mistress favour: and such a coil there is;
Such fending, and such proving; she stands off,
And will by no means yield to composition:
He offers any price; his body to her.
She is a hard Lady, denies that caution.
And now they whine, &amp; now they rave: faith Princes,
It were a good point of charity to piece 'em;
For less then such a power will doe just nothing:
And if you mean to see him, there it must be,
For there will he grow, till he be transplanted.
Beseech your Grace, lets wait upon you thither,
That I may see that beauty dares deny him,
That scornful beauty.
I should think it worse now;
Ill brought up beauty.
She has too much reason for it;
Which with too great a grief, I shame to think of,
But we'll go see this game.
Rather this wonder.
Be you our guide Leontius, here's a new peace. 
Thus far you shall persuade me still to honour ye,
Still to live with ye sir, or near about ye;
For not to lye, you have my first and last love,
But since you have conceived an evil against me,
An evil that so much concerns your honour,
That honour aimed by all at for a pattern:
And though there be a false thought, and confessed too,
And much repentance fallen in shores to purge it;
Yet, whilst that great respect I ever bore ye,
Dwells in my blood, and in my heart that duty;
Had it but been a dream, I must not touch ye.
O you will make some other happy?
Never,
Upon this Hand I'll seal that faith.
We may kiss,
Put not those out of the peace too.
Those I'll give ye,
So there you will be pleased to pitch your ultra,
I will be merry with ye; sing, discourse with ye,
Be your poor Mistress still: in truth I love ye.
Stay, who are these?
A very handsome Lady?
As ere you saw.
Pity her heart's so cruel.
How does your Grace? he stands still, will not hear us.
We come to serve ye sir, in all our fortunes.
He bows a little now; he's strangely altered.
Ha? pray ye a word Leontius, pray ye a word with ye
Lysimachus? you both knew mine Enanthe,
I lost in Antioch, when the Town was taken,
Mine uncle slain, Antigonus had the sack on it?
Yes, I remember well the girl.
Methinkes now
That face is wondrous like her: I have her Picture,
The same, but more years on her; the very same.
A cherry to a cherry is not liker.
Look on her eyes.
Most certain she is like her:
Many a time have I dandled her in these arms sir,
And I hope who will more.
What's that ye look at, Princes?
This picture, and that Lady sir.
Ha: they are near:
They only err in time.
Did you mark that blush there?
That came the nearest.
I must speak to her.
You'll quickly be resolved.
Your name sweet Lady?
Enanthe, sir: and this to beg your blessing.
Doe you know me?
If you be the King Seleucus,
I know you are my father.
Peace a little,
Where did I lose ye?
At the sack of Antioch,
Where my good Uncle died, and I was taken,
By a mean soldier taken: by this Prince,
This noble Prince, redeemed from him again,
Where ever since I have remained his servant.
My joys are now too full: welcome Enanthe,
Mine own, my dearest, and my best Enanthe.
And mine too desperate.
You shall not think so,
This is a peace indeed.
I hope it shall be,
And ask it first.
Most royal sir, ye have it.
I once more beg it thus.
You must not be denied sir.
By me, I am sure he must not: sure he shall not;
Kneeling I give it too; kneeling I take it;
And from this hour, no envious spite ere part us.
The gods give happy joys; all comforts to ye.
My new Enanthe.
Come, beat all the Drums up,
And all the noble instruments of war:
Let 'em fill all the Kingdom with their sounds;
And those the brazen arch of heaven break through,
While to the Temple we conduct these two.
May they be ever loving, ever young,
And ever worthy of those lines they sprung;
May their fair issues walk with time along.
And hang a coward now; and there's my song.
would some man would instruct me what to say:
For this same Prologue, usual to a play,
Is tied to such an old form of Petition;
Men must say nothing now beyond commission:
The cloaks we wear, the legs we make, the place
We stand in, must be one; and one the face.
Nor altered, nor exceeded; if it be,
A general hiss, hangs on our levity:
We have a Play, a new Play to play now,
And thus low in our Plays behalf we bow;
We bow to beg your suffrage, and kind ear;
If it were nought, or that it might appear
A thing boyed up by prayer, Gentlemen,
Believe my faith, you should not see me then.
Let them speak then have power to stop a storm,
I never loved to feel a house so warm:
But for the Play, if you dare credit me,
I think it well: All new things you shall see,
And those disposed to all the mirth that may;
And short enough we hope: and such a Play
You were wont to like: sit nobly then, and see:
If it miscarry, pray look not for me.
I Am not cured yet thoroughly; for believe
I feel another passion that may grieve
All over me I feel it too: and now
It takes me cold, cold, cold, I know not how:
As you are good men help me, a Carouse
May make me love you all, all here in the house,
And all that comes to see me dotingly:
Now lend your hands; and for your courtesy,
The next employment I am sent upon,
I'll swear you are Physicians, the wars none.

