Tic true she is a right good Princes, and a just one;
And Florence when she sets has lost a Planet.
My Mistress? I tell thee gentle Nephew,
There is not such another friend to goodness,
To down-right dealing, to faith and true heart
Within the Christian confines: Before she blessed us,
Justice was a Cheese-monger; a mere Cheese-monger,
Weighed nothing to the World but mites and maggots,
And a maine stink: Law like a Horse-courser,
Her rules, and precepts hung with gauds and ribbons,
And pampered up to cousin him that bought her,
When she her self was hackney lame and foundered.
But the sweet Lady,
Belvidere the bright one—
I, there's a face indeed: O my dear Nephew;
Could a young fellow of thy fiery mettle
Freeze, and that Lady in his arms?
I think not.
Thou hast a parlous judgement; but let that pass,
She is as truly virtuous, fair, and noble,
As her great Mother's good; and that's not ordinary.
But why (so many Princes, and so great ones
Being Suitors) should the Duchess deny to match her?
She is a Jewel man, hangs in her bosom,
Her only Child: with her eyes she sees all things,
Discourses with her tongue, and pluck her from her
(So dotingly the old one loves her young one)
You pluck her heart out too: Besides, of late days,
The Duke of Millaine, who could never win her
By love, nor treaty, laid a close train for her
In her own private walks: some forty Horse-men,
So to surprise her; which we found, and dealt with,
And sent 'em running home to the Duke their Master,
Like Dogs with bottles at their tails.
Since that, I heard Sir,
She has sent her to your Citadel to secure her,
My cousin Rodope, your wife attending her.
You hear a truth, and all convenient pleasures
Are there proportioned for her.
I would fine Sir,
Like one that owes a duteous service to her
Sometimes, so please you—
Gentle Cousin pardon me,
I must not, nor you must not dare to offer,
The last Edict lies on his life pu•sues it;
Your friend Sir to command, abroad to love you,
To lend ye any thing I have, to wait upon ye,
But in the Citadel where I stand charged,
Not a bit upon a march: no service Sir,
No, good Sir by no means: I kiss your hands Sir. 
To your keeping only? none else to look upon her?
None but Bartello worthy her attendance?
No faith but his to serve her? O Belvidere,
Thou Saint to whom my youth is sacrificed,
Thou point to which my life turns, and my fortune,
Art thou locked from me now? from all my comforts,
Art thou snatched violently? thou hear me not,
Nor can thou see (fair soul) thy Servants mornings,
Yet let thy gentle heart feel what is absence,
The great divorce of minds so truly loving,
So long, and nursed in one affection
Even from our infant eyes, sucked in and nourished:
O let it feel but that, and there stand constant
And I am blessed. My dear Niece Rodope,
That is her Governess, did love me dearly,
There's one hope yet to see her: when he is absent
It may be ventured, and she may work it closely:
I know the Ladies will goes equal with me,
And so the danger of the Edict avoided;
Let me think more, for I must try all hazards.
Will ye go yonder Sir?
Yes marry will I Sir.
And by this Ladder?
By that Ladder, coxcomb.
Have ye any more necks at home when this is broken,
For this will crack with the best friend he has Sir?
Or can you pitch of all four, like an Ape now?
Let me see you tumble.
You are very pleasant Sir.
No truly Sir, I should be loath to see ye
Come fluttering down like a young Rooke, cry squab,
And take ye up with your brains beaten into your buttocks
Hold your peace Ass: who's this stands musing here?
Silvio?
Who calls me?
One most glad to see you Sir.
My dearest Claudio? what make you thus private,
And with a preparation of this nature?
We have leave to play, and are going to climb Birds nests.
Prithee what is it friend? why start ye from me?
Is your old Mistress grown so coy and cruel,
She must be scaled? it seems you are loath to tell me,
Since twenty years continuance of our friendship
May not be worth the weight of such a secret,
Twill be but rude to ask again: 'save ye.
Nay stay, dear Silvio, if you love me take it:
For till you know it, never woman laboured
As I do now.
Isle do my best to ease it.
You have heard the Lady Belvidere—
What heard Sir?
Heard to the Citadel, upon some fears
She is confined.
Why dreams he on this beauty?
It is true, I have heard it.
And that no access,
No blessing from those eyes but with much hazard,
Even hazard of a life.
He dares not love her;
I have heard that too: but whither points your purpose?
O Silvio, let me speak that none may hear me,
None but thy truth: I have loved this Lady long,
Long given away my life to her devotion,
Long dwelt upon that beauty to my ruin.
Do's she know this?
No, there begins my misery,
Ixion-like, I have only yet clasped Clouds,
And fed upon poor empty dreams that starve me.
And what do you mean to do now?
Though I dye for it,
Though all the tortures in the world hung on me,
Armed with imperious Love, I stand prepared now,
With this to reach her Chamber: there to see her,
And tell her boldly with what truth I love her.
Twill not be easily done Sir.
O my Silvio,
The hardest things are sweetest in possession.
Nor will show much discretion.
Love is blind man,
And he that looks for reason there far blinder.
Have ye considered ripely?
All that may fall,
And armed against that all.
Her honour too?
What she may suffer in this rash adventure?
The beauty of her name?
Isle do it closely,
And only at her window, with that caution—
Are there no Guards?
Corruption chokes their service.
Or do you hold her bred so light a woman
To hold commerce with strange tongues?
Why this service,
This only hazard of my life must tell her,
Though she were Vistas self, I must deserve her.
I would not have ye go: pray let it sink here,
And think a nobler way to raise your service,
A safer, and a wiser.
It is too late Sir.
Then I must say, You shall not go.
I shall not?
You shall not go: that part bred with ye, friendship
Bids me say boldly so, and you observe me.
You stretch that tie too far.
Isle stretch it farther:
The honour that I bear that spotless virtue
You foully seek to taint, unnobly covet,
Bids me command ye stay: if not, thus force ye.
This will be worse then climbing.
Why do ye draw Sir?
To kill thee, if thy base will be thy Master.
I ever was your friend.
Whilst thou were honest,
And not a Night-theife of another honour;
I never called a Fool my friend, a mad-man,
That durst expose his fame to all opinions,
His life to unhonest dangers: I never loved him,
Durst know his name, that sought a Virgins ruin,
Nor ever took I pleasure in acquaintance
With men, that give as loose raynes to their fancies
As the wilde Ocean to his raging fluxes:
A noble soul I twin with, and my love
Follows, his life dares master his affections.
Will ye give off, or fight?
I will not fight with ye:
The sacred name of friend ties up that anger,
Rather isle study.
Do, to be a friend still.
If this way, I shall never hold.
Isle watch ye:
And if I catch ye false: by Heaven ye dye for it,
All love forgot.
When I fear that I am fit for it. 
Whilst prodigal young gaudy Fools are banqueting,
And launching out their states to catch the giddy,
Thus do I study to preserve my fortune,
And hatch with care at home the wealth that Saints me.
Here's Rubies of Bengal, rich, rich, glorious;
These Diamonds of Ormus bought for little,
Here vented at the price of Princes Ransoms;
How bright they shine like constellations,
The South seas treasure here, Pearl, fair and orient
Able to equal Cleapatra's Banquet,
Here chains of lesser stones for Ladies lustres,
Ingots of Gold, Rings, Brooches, bars of Silver,
These are my studies to set off in sale well,
And not in sensual surfeits to consume 'em;
How rosts mine egg? he heats apace, isle turn him:
Penurio, where you knave do you wait? Penurio,
You lazy knave.
Did you call Sir?
Whore's your Mistress?
What vanity holds her from her attendance?
The very sight of this egg has made him cockish,
What would a dozen buttered do? She is within Sir.
Within Sir, at what thrift ye knave? what getting?
Getting a good stomach Sir, &amp; she knew where to get meat to it,
She is praying heartily upon her knees Sir,
That Heaven would send her a good bearing dinner.
Nothing but gluttony and surfeit thought on,
Health flung behind: had she not yesternight firrah
Two Sprats to supper, and the oil allowable?
Was she not sick with eating? Had not thou,
(Thou most ungrateful knave, that nothing satisfies)
The water that I boiled my other egg in
To make thee hearty broth?
It is true, I had Sir;
But I might as soon make the Philosophers Stone on it,
You gave it me in water, and but for manners sake,
I could give it you again in wind, it was so hearty
I shall turn pissing Conduit shortly: my Mistress comes Sir.
Welcome my Dove.
Pray ye keep your welcome to ye,
Unless it carries more then words to please me,
Is this the joy to be a Wife? to bring with me,
Besides the nobleness of blood I spring from,
A full and able portion to maintain me?
Is this the happiness of youth and beauty,
The great content of being made a Mistress,
To live a Slave subject to wants, and hungers,
To jealousies for every eye that wanders?
Unmanly jealousy.
Good Isabella.
Too good for you: do you think to famish me,
Or keep me like an Almes-woman in such raiment,
Such poor unhandsome weeds? am I old, or ugly?
I never was bred thus: and if your misery
Will suffer wilful blindness to abuse me,
My patience shall be no Bawd to mine own ruin.
Tickle him Mistress: to him.
Had ye love in ye,
Or any patt of man—
Follow that Mistress.
Or had humanity but ever known ye,
You would shame to use a woman of my way thus,
So poor, and basely: you are strangely jealous of me
If I should give ye cause.
How Isabella?
As do not venture this way to provoke me.
Excellent well Mistress,
How's this Isabella?
Twill stir a Saint, and I am but a woman,
And by that tenure may.
By no means Chicken,
You know I love ye: fie, take no example
By those young gadding Dames: (you are noted virtuous)
That stick their Husbands wealth in trifles on 'em
And point 'em but the way to their own miseries:
I am not jealous, kiss me, — I am not:
And for your diet, it is to keep you healthful,
Surfeits destroy more then the sword: that I am careful
Your meat should be both neat, and cleanly handled
See, Sweet, I am Cook my self, and mine own Cater.
A — of that Cook cannot lick his fingers.
Isle add another dish: you shall have Milk to it,
It is nourishing and good.
With Butter in it Sir?
This knave would breed a famine in a Kingdom:
And cloths that shall content ye: you must be wise then,
And live sequestered to your self and me,
Not wandering after every toy comes cross ye,
Nor struck with every spleen: what's the knave doing? Penurio.
Hunting Sir, for a second course of flies here,
They are rare new Salads.
For certain Isabella
This ravening fellow has a Woolf in's belly:
Intemperate knave, will nothing quench thy appetite?
I saw him eat two Apples, which is monstrous.
If you had given me those 'thad bin more monstrōs.
It is a maine miracle to feed this villain,
Come Isabella, let us in to Supper,
And think the Roman dainties at our Table,
It is all but thought. 
Would all my thoughts would do it:
The Devil should think of purchasing that Egge-shell,
To victual out a Witch for the Burmoothes:
It is treason to any good stomach living now
To hear a tedious Grace said, and no meat to 't,
I have a Radish yet, but that's but transitory. 
Can any living man unless a Rascal
That neither knows himself, nor a fashioned Gentleman
Take me for a worse man then my Master now?
I am naturally proud in these cloths: but if pride now
Should catch a fall in what I am attempting,
It is but a Proverb sound, and a Neck broken,
That's the worst can come on it: a Gentleman's gone then,
A Gentleman of the first house, there's the end on it:
My Master lies most pitifully complaining,
Wringing and kicking up to the ears in love yonder,
And such a lamentable noise he keeps, it kills me:
I have got his cloths, and if I can get to her
By hook or crook here, such a song isle sing her—
I think I shall be hanged, but that's no matter,
What's a hanging among friends: I am valiant now as an Elephant;
What's a hanging among friends: I am valiant now as an
I have considered what to say too: let me see now,
This is the place, it is plaguy high: stay at that lower window
Let me aim finely now, like a good Gunner,
It may prove but a whipping.
I saw some-body
Pass by me now, and though it were dark, me thought yet
I knew the clothes: ha, let me not be cozened,
The Ladder too, ready to fling it? monstrous,
It is he, it is Claudio: most voluptuous villain,
Scandal to women's credit: Love, I forget thee.
What will he do in the name of heaven, what's that there?
And all the friendship that I bore thee, bury here.
What has he in's hand? I hope but a Cudgel.
Thy fault's forgive O Heaven: farewell thou traitor.
I am slain: I am slain.
He's down, and dead: dead certain,
It was too rash, too full of spleen, stark dead:
This is no place now to repent in, only
Would I had given this hand that shot the Pistol
I had missed thee, and thou were once more Claudio. 
Why should I love thus foolishly? thus desperately?
And give away my heart where no hope's left me?
Why should not the true counsel of a friend restrain me?
The Devils mouth I run into affright me,
The honour of the Lady charm my wildness;
I have no power, no being of my self,
No reason strong enough now left within me
To bind my will: O Love, thou God, or Devil,
Or what thou art that plays the tyrant in me.
Oh.
What's that cry?
A Surgeon, a Surgeon,
Twenty good Surgeons.
It is not far from me,
Some Murder of my life,
Will you let me dye here?
No drink come, nor no Surgeon?
It is my man sure,
His voice, and here he lies: how is it with thee?
I am slain, Sir, I am slain.
Slain? Who has slain thee?
Killed, killed, out-right killed.
Whore's thy hurt?
I know not,
But I am sure I am killed.
Can thou sit up,
That I may find the hurt out?
I can sit up,
But ne'er the less I am slain.
It is not o'this side?
No Sir, I think it be not.
Nor of this side,
Was it done with a Sword?
A Gun, a Gun sweet Master.
The devil a' bullet has been here: thou art well, man.
No sure, I am killed.
Let me see thy thighs, and belly,
As whole as a Fish for any thing I see yet:
Thou bleed no where.
I think I do not bleed Sir,
But yet I am afraid I am slain.
Stand up Fool,
Thou hast as much hurt as my nail: who shot thee,
A Pottle, or a Pint?
Seignior Silvio shot me
In these clothes, taking me for you, and seeing
The Ladder in my hand here, which I stole from ye,
Thinking to have gone to the Lady my self, &amp; have spoke for ye
If he had hit ye home, he had served ye right sir,
You saucy rogue, how poor my intent shows to me,
How naked now, and foolish?
Are ye sure he has not hit me,
It gave a monstrous bounce?
You rise of your right side,
And said your prayers too, you had been payed else:
But what need thou a Bullet when thy fear kills thee?
Sirrah, keep your own counsel for all this, you'll be hanged else,
If it be known.
If it be by my means let me;
I am glad I am not killed, and far more gladder
My gentleman-like humours out: I feel it is dangerous,
And to be a gentleman, is to be killed twice a week.
Keep your self close in the Country for a while sir.
There's Money, walk to your friends.
They have no Pistols,
Nor are no Gentlemen, that's my comfort. 
I will retire too, and live private; for this Silvio
Inflamed with nobleness will be my death else;
And if I can forget this love that loads me,
At least the danger: and now I think on it better,
I have some conclusions else invites me to it. 
NEphew.
My dear Ant.
Would you go by thus silly
And never see me, not once send in to me
Your loving Niece? she that above all those
I call my Kindred honoured you, and placed you
Nearest my heart?
I thank you worthy Cousin,
But such at this time are my occasions—
You shall not go yet, by my faith you shall not,
I will not be denied: why look ye sad Nephew?
I am seldom other: O, this blood sits heavy:
As I walked this way late last night,
In meditation of some things concerned me—
What Nephew?
Why me thought I heard a Piece, Lady,
A piece shot off, much about this place too,
But could not judge the cause, nor what it boaded,
Under the Castle wall.
We heard it too,
And the Watch pursued it presently, but found nothing,
Not any tract.
I am right glad to hear it:
The Ruffians surely, that command the night
Have found him, stripped him: and into the River
Conveyed the body.
You look still sadder, Nephew,
Is any thing within these walls to comfort ye?
Speak, and be master of it.
Ye are a right Courtier,
A great Professor, but a poor performer.
Do you doubt my faith: you never found me that way
I dare well speak it boldly, but a true friend.
Continue then.
Try me, and see who falters.
I will, and presently: it is in your power
To make me the most bound man to your curtsy.
Let me know how, and if I fail—
It is thus then,
Get me access to the Lady Belvidere
But for a minute, but to see her: your Husband now
Is safe at Court, I left him full employed there.
You have asked the thing without my power to grant ye,
The Law lies on the danger: if I loved ye not
I would bid ye go, and there be found, and dye for it.
I knew your love, and where there showed a danger
How far you durst step for me: give me a true friend,
That where occasion is to doe a benefit
Aims at the end, and not the rubs before it;
I was a fool to ask ye this, a more fool
To think a woman had so much noble nature
To entertain a secret of this burden;
Ye had best to tell the Duchess I persuaded ye,
That's a fine course, and one will win ye credit;
Forget the name of Cousin, blot my blood out,
And so you raise your self, let me grow shorter.
A woman friend? he that believes that weakness
Steers in a stormy night without a Compass.
What is it I durst not do might not impeach ye?
Why this ye dare not do, ye dare not think of.
It is a maine hazard.
If it were not so
I would not come to you to seek a favour.
You will lose your self.
The loss ends with my self then.
You will but see her?
Only look upon her.
Not stay?
Prescribe your time.
Not traffic with her
In any close dishonourable actions?
Stand you your self by.
I will venture for ye,
Because ye shall be sure I am a touched friend,
Isle bring her to ye: come walk, you know the Garden,
And take this key to open the little Postern,
There stand no guards.
I shall soon find it Cousin. 
Is the Captain come home?
No, who commands the Guard to night?
I think Petruchio.
What's the Word?
None knows yet.
I would this Lady were married out of the way once,
Or out of our custodies; I wish they wold take in more com¦panies,
For I am sure we feel her in our duties shrewdly.
It is not her fault I warrant ye, she is ready for it,
And that's the plague, when they grow ripe for marriage
They must be slipped like Hawks.
Give me a mean wench,
No State doubt lies on her, she is always ready.
Come to the Guard, it is late, and sure the Captain
Can not be long away.
I have watched these three nights,
To morrow they may keep me tame for nothing. 
This is the place I think; what Light is that there?
The Lady and my Cousin?
Is this the Garden?
Yes Madam.
O my blessed Mistress,
Saint of my soul.
Speak softly: take me to ye,
O Silvio I am thine, thine ever Silvio.
Is this your promise Sir? Lady your honour?
I am undone if this be seen, disgraced,
Fallen under all discredit.
Do you love still?
Dear, do you keep your old faith?
Ever Lady;
And when that fails me, all that's good forsake me.
Do not you shame? Madam, I must not suffer this,
I will not suffer it; men call you virtuous,
What do you mean to lose your self thus? Silvio
I charge thee get away, charge you retire ye,
Isle call the watch else.
Call all the world to see us,
We live in one another happiness,
And so will die.
Here will I hang for ever.
As ye respect me, as hereafter Madam
You would enjoy his love—nothing prevail with ye?
Il'e try my strength then; get thee gone thou villain,
Thou Promise-breaker.
I am tide, I cannot.
Isle ring the Bell then.
Ring it to death, I am fixed here.
I saw a light over the Garden walk,
Hard by the Ladies Chamber, here's some knavery
As I live, I saw it twice.
The Guard, the Guard there;
I must not suffer this, it is too mischievous.
Light up the torch, I feared this, ha? young Silvio?
How got he in?
The Devil brought him in sure
He came not by us.
My wife between 'em bustling?
Guard, pull him off.
Now, now, ye feel the misery.
You, Madam, at an hour so far indecent?
Death, O my soul! this is a foul fault in ye,
Your mothers care abused too, light's to her Chamber,
I am sorry to see this.
Farewell my Sylvio,
And let no danger sink thee.
Nor death Lady. 
Are ye so hot? I shall prepare ye Physic
Will purge ye finely, neatly; you are too fiery,
Think of your prayers, Sir, and you have not forgot 'em;
Can ye fly in the ayre, or creep ye in at key-holes?
I have a gin will catch ye though you conjured:
Take him to Guard to night, to strong and sure Guard;
Isle back to'th Duchess presently: no less sport serve ye,
Then the Heir to a Dukedom? play at push-pin there Sir?
It was well aimed, but plague upon it, you shot short,
And that will lose your game.
I know the loss then. 
Now, in this habit may I safely see
How my incensed friend carries my murder,
Who little I imagined had been wrought
To such a height of rage; and much I grieve now
Mine own blind passion had so mastered me,
I could not see his love, for sure he loves her,
And on a nobler ground then I pretended.
It must be so, it is so; what Penurio,
My shotten friend, what wind blew you?
Faith it is true,
Any strong wind will blow me like a feather,
I am all Ayre, nothing of earth within me,
Nor have not had this month, but that good Dinner
Your Worship gave me yesterday, that stays by me,
And gives me ballasse, else the Sun would draw me.
But do's my Mistress speak still of me?
Yes Sir,
And in her sleep, that makes my Master mad too,
And turn and fart for anger.
Art sure she saw me?
She saw ye at a window.
It is most true,
In such a place I saw a Gentlewoman,
A young, sweet handsome woman.
That's she, that's she Sir.
And well she viewed me, I viewed her.
Still she Sir.
At last she blushed, and then looked off.
That blush Sir,
If you can read it truly—
But did thou tell her,
Or did thou fool me, thou knew such a one?
I told her, and I told her such a sweet tale—
But did she hear thee?
With a thousand ears Sir,
And swallowed what I said as greedily,
As great-bellyed women do Cherries, stones and all Sir.
Methinkes she should not love thy Master?
Hang him Pilcher,
There's nothing loves him: his own Cat cannot endure him,
She had better lye with a Bear, for he is so hairy,
That a tame warren of flies frisk round about him.
And wilt thou work still?
Like a Miner for ye.
And get access.
Or conjure you together,
It is her desire to meet: she is poisoned with him,
And till she take a sweet fresh ayre, that's you Sir.
There's money for thee: thou art a precious Varlet,
Be fat, be fat, and blow thy Master backward.
Blow you my Mistress Sir, as flat as a flounder,
Then blow her up again as Butchers blow their Veales;
If she dye upon the same
Bury her, bury her in Gods name.
Thou art a merry knave: by this hand isle feed thee,
Till thou crack'st at both ends, if thou dare do this
Thou shalt eat no fantastical Porridge,
Nor lick the dish where oil was yesterday,
Dust, and dead flies to day; Capons, fat Capons—
O hearty sound.
Cramb'd full of itching Oysters.
Will ye have the Duchess?
And Lobsters big as Gauntlets,
Thou shalt despise base Beef.
I do despise it,
And now me thinks I feel a Tart come sliding.
Leaping into thy mouth: but first deal faithfully.
When will ye come?
To morrow.
Isle attend ye,
For then my Master will be out in business.
What news abroad?
'Mas as I was coming to you,
I heard that Seignior Silvio, a good Gentleman,
Many a good meal I have eaten with him—
What of him?
Was this day to be Arraigned before the Duchess,
But why I could not hear.
Silvio arraigned?
Go, get ye gone, and think of me.
I fly Sir. 
Arraigned? for what? for my supposed death? no,
That cannot be sure, there's no rumour of it,
Be it what it will, I will be there and see it,
And if my help will bring him off he has it. 
Read the Edict last made,
Keep silence there.
If any man of what condition soever, and a subject, after the publishing of this Edict, shall without special Licence from the great Duchess, attempt or buy, offer, or make an attempt, to solicit the love of the Princess Bell∣videre, the person so offending shall forfeit his life.
The reason why my Royal Mistress here
In her last Treaty with Siennas Duke,
Promised her beauteous Daughter there in marriage,
The Duke of Millaine, rival in this fortune,
Un-nobly sought by practise to betray her;
Which found, and crossed, the Citadel received her
There to secure her Mothers word; the last cause
So many Gentlemen of late enamoured
On this most beauteous Princess, and not brooking
One more then other, to deserve a favour,
Blood has been spilt, many brave spirits lost,
And more unless she had been kept close from their violence
Had like to have followed: therefore for due prevention
Of all such hazards and unnoble actions,
This last Edict was published, which thou Silvio
Like a false man, a bad man, and a Traitor
Hast rent a pieces, and contemned; for which cause
Thou stand a guilty man here now. 
Speak Silvio,
What can thou say to avoid the hand of Justice?
Nothing, but I confess, submit, &amp; lay my head to it.
Have ye no eyes my Lords, no understandings?
The Gentleman will cast himself away,
Cast himself wilfully: are you, or you guilty?
No more is he, no more taint sticks upon him:
I drew him thither, it was my way betrayed him,
I got the entrance kept, I entertained him,
I hid the danger from him, forced him to me,
Poor gentle soul, he's in no part transgressing,
I wrote unto him.
Do not wrong that honour,
Cast not upon that pureness these aspersions,
By Heaven it was my love, my violence,
My life must answer it: I broke in to her,
Tempted the Law, solicited unjustly.
As there is truth in Heaven I was the first cause,
How could this man have come to me, left naked
Without my counsel and provision?
What hour could he find out to pass the Watchs,
But I must make it sure first? Reverend Judges,
Be not abused, nor let an innocent life lye
Upon your shaking Conscience; I did it,
My love the maine wheel that set him a going:
His motion but compelled.
Can ye believe this,
And know with what a modesty and whiteness
Her life was ever ranked? Can you believe this
And see me here before ye young, and wilful?
Apt to what danger Love dares thrust me on,
And where Law stops my way, apt to contemn it?
If I were bashful, old, or dull, and sleepy
In Loves alarms, a woman might awake me,
Direct, and clew me out the way to happiness:
But I like fire, kindled with that bright beauty,
Catch hold of all occasions, and run through 'em.
I charge ye as your honest souls will answer it.
I charge ye, as you are the friends to virtue,
That has no pattern living but this Lady.
Let not his blood—
Let not her wilfulness—
For then you act a scene Hell will rejoice at.
He is clear.
She is as white in this as infants.
The god of Love protect your cause, and help ye,
Two nobler pieces of affection
These eyes ne'er looked on, if such goodness perish,
Let never true hearts meet again, but break. 
A strange example of strong love, a rare one.
Madam, we know not what to say to think on.
I must confess it strikes me tender too,
Searches my Mothers heart: you found 'em there?
Yes certain Madam.
And so linked together?
As they had been one piece of Alabaster.
Nothing dishonourable?
So let my soul have happiness,
As that thought yet durst never seek this bosom.
What shall I do? 'has broke my law, abused me,
Fine would I know the truth, either confess it,
And let me understand the maine offender,
Or both shall feel the torture.
Are ye a Mother?
The Mother of so sweet a Rose as this is?
So pure a Flower? and dare ye lose that nature?
Dare ye take to your self so great a wickedness,
(O holy Heaven) of thinking what may ruin
This goodly building? this temple where the gods dwell?
Give me a thousand tortures, I deserve 'em,
And show me death in all the shapes imagined.
No death but I will answer it, meet it, seek it;
No torture but isle laugh upon it, and kiss it.
This is no way.
They say no more for certain
Then their strong hearts will suffer.
I have bethought me;
No Lords, although I have a Child offending,
Nature dares not forget she is a Child still;
Till now I never looked on love imperious:
I have bethought me of a way to break ye,
To separate, though not your loves your bodies:
Silvio attend, isle be your Judge my self now,
The sentence of your death (because my Daughter
Will bear an equal part in your afflictions)
I take away and pardon: this remains then
An easy, and a gentle punishment,
And this shall be fulfilled: because unnobly
You have sought the love, and marriage of a Princess,
The absolute and sole Heir of this Dukedom,
By that means as we must imagine strongly,
To plant your self into this Rule hereafter,
We here pronounce ye a man banished from us.
For ever banished Lady?
Yet more mercy,
But for a year: and then again in this place
To make your full appearance: yet more pity,
If in that time you can absolve a question,
Writ down within this scroll, absolve it rightly,
This Lady is your wife, and shall live with ye;
If not, you loose your head.
I take this honour,
And humbly kiss those Royal hands.
Receive it: Bartello, to your old guard take the Princess,
And so the Court break up.
Farewell to all,
And to that spotless heart my endless service. 
What will this prove?
Isle tell you a year hence, Sir. 
Are you pleased now? have I not wrought this wonder
Non eben fatto Seignior.
Rarely Penurio.
Close, close then, and work wax.
I am studying for thee
A dinner, that shall victual thee for ten year.
Do you hear Mistress?
You know what a dundier whelp my Master is,
I need not preach to ye, how unfit and wanting
To give a woman satisfaction:
How he stinks, and snores, a Bull's a better bed-fellow;
And for his love never let that deceive ye.
Nay sure he loves me not.
If he could coin ye,
Or turn ye into mettle much might be then;
He loves not any thing but what is traffic:
I have heard him swear he would sell ye to the grand Signior.
The Turk.
The very Turk, and how they would use ye.
Isle fit him fort: the Turk?
I know the price too:
Now ye have time to pay him, pay him home Mistress;
Pay him of the pate, clout him for all his courtesies;
Here's one that dances in your eyes, young delicate
To work this vengeance; if ye let it slip now,
There is no pitying of ye, od's precious, Mistress,
Were I his wife, I would so mall his Mozart,
It is charity, mere charity, pure charity,
Are you the first? has it not been from Eves time,
Women would have their safe revenges this way?
And good, and gracious women, excellent women;
Is it not a handsome Gentleman? a sweet Gentleman?
View him from head to foot, a complete Gentleman;
When can ye hope the like again? I leave ye,
And my revenge too, with ye; I know my Office,
Isle not be far off, be not long a fumbling,
When danger shall appear, Isle give the larme. 
You are welcome Sir, and would it were my fortune
To afford a Gentleman of your fair seeming,
A freer entertainment then this house has,
You partly know Sir.—
Know, and pity Lady,
Such sweetness in the bud, should be so blasted;
Dare you make me your Servant?
Dare you make Sir,
That service worthy of a women's favour
By constancy and goodness?
Here I swear to ye,
By the unvalued love I bear this beauty,
(And kiss the Book too) never to be recreant,
To honour ye, to truly love, and serve ye,
My youth to wait upon ye, what my wealth has.
O make me not so poor, to sell affection,
Those bought love's Sir, wear faster then the moneys;
A handsome Gentleman.
A most delicate sweet one,
Let my truth Purchase then.
I should first try it,
But you may happily.—
You shall not doubt me,
I hope she loves me; when I prove false shame take me;
Will ye believe a little?
I fear, too much, Sir.
And will ye love a little?
That should be your part.
Thus I begin then, thus and thus.
A good beginning,
We have a Proverb says, makes a good ending.
Say ye so? it is well inferred.
Good Sir, your patience:
Me thinks I have ventured now, like a weak Bark
Upon a broken billow, that will swallow me,
Upon a rough sea of suspicions,
Stuck round with jealous rocks.
A hem, a hem there.
This is my man; my fears too soon have found me,
Now what's the news?
A pox of yonder old Regal,
The Captain, the old Captain.
What old Captain?
Captain courageous yonder of the Castle,
Captain dondeigo, old Bartello.
Where is he?
He's coming in:
It would vex the Devil, that such an old Potgun as this,
That can make no sport, should hinder them that can do it.
I would not have him see the Gentleman
For all the world, my credit were undone then.
Shall I fling a pisse-pot on's head as he comes in,
And take him into'th Kitchen, there to dry him.
That will not do; and he is so humorous too
He will come in.
What is he?
One much troubles me.
And can do nothing, cannot eat.
Your sight now,
Out of a drivelling dotage he bears to me,
May make him tell my husband, and undo me.
What would ye have me do?
But for a while Sir,
Step here behind this hanging, presently
I'll answer him, and then.—
I will obey ye.
Whore's my rich Jeweller? I have stones to set.
He is abroad, and sure Sir.
Ther's for your service:
Wher's the fair Lady? all alone sweet beauty?
She's never much alone Sir, that's acquainted
With such companions as good honest thoughts are.
Isle sit down by thee, and isle kiss thy hand too,
And in thine ear swear by my life I love thee.
Ye are a merry Captain.
And a mad one, Lady;
By th'mas thou hast goodly eyes, excellent eyes, wench,
Ye twinkling rogue, look what thy Captain brings thee,
Thou must needs love me, love me heartily,
Hug me, and love me, hug me close.
Fie Captain.
Nay, I have strength, and I can strain ye sirrah,
And vault into my seat as nimbly, little one.
As any of your smooth chinned boys in Florence,
I must needs commit a little folly with ye,
Isle not be long, a brideling case, and away wench;
The hobnail thy husband's as fitly out of the way now.
Do you think he keeps a bawdy house?
That's all one.
Or did you ever see that lightness in my carriage,
That you might promise to your self —
Away fool,
A good turn's a good turn; I am an honest fellow.
You have a handsome wife, a virtuous Gentlewo∣man.
They are not for this time of the year.
A Lady,
That ever bore that great respect to you,
That noble constancy.
That's more then I know.
O Mistress, ye are undone, my Master's coming.
Coming hard by here.
Plague Consume the Rascal,
Shall I make petty-patties of him?
Now what love Sir?
Fear of your coming made him jealous first;
Your finding here, will make him mad and desperate,
And what in that wilde mood he will execute—
I can think of nothing, I have no wit left me,
Certain my heads a mustard-pot.
I have thought Sir.
And if you'll please to put in execution
What I conceive—
I'll do it, tell it quickly.
Draw your Sword quickly, and go down enraged,
As if you had pursued some foe up hither,
And grumble to your self extremely, terribly,
But not a word to him, and so pass by him.
Isle do it perfectly.
Stand you still good Sir.
Rascal, slave, villain, take a house so poorly,
After thou hast wronged a Gentleman, a Soldier,
Base Poltroon boy, you will forsake your nest sirrah.
The matter, good sweet Captain?
Run-away rogue,
And take a house to cover thy base cowardice,
Isle whip ye, Isle so scourge ye. 
Mercy upon me,
What's all this matter wife?
Did you meet the mad man?
I never saw the Captain so provoked yet.
O he's a Devil sure, a most bloody devil,
He followed a young Gentleman, his sword drawn,
With such a fury, how I shake to think on it,
And foyn'd, and fleshed at him, and swore he'd kill him,
Drove him up hither, followed him still bloodily,
And if I had not hid him, sure had slain him;
A merciless old man.
Most virtuous Lady,
Even as the giver of my life, I thank ye.
This fellow must not stay here, he is too hansom;
He is gone Sir, and you may pass now with all security,
Isle be your guide my self, and such a way
Isle lead ye, none shall cross, nor none shall know ye.
The doore's left open Sirrah, isle starve you for this trick,
Isle make thee fast of Sondayes; and for you Lady,
Isle have your lodgings farther off, and closer,
Isle have no street lights to you; will you go Sir?
I thank ye Sir; the Devil take this fortune;
And once more all my service to your goodness. 
Now could I eat my very arms for madness,
Crossed in the nick of the matter? vengeance take it,
And that old Cavalier that spoiled our Cock-fight;
Isle lay the next plot surer.
I am glad and sorry;
Glad, that I got so fairly off suspicion;
Sorry I lost my new loved friend.
Not lost Mistress;
Isle conjure once again to raise that spirit;
In, and look soberly upon the matter,
We'll ring him one peal more, and if that fall,
The Devil take the clappers, bells, and all. 
NOw, Rhodope, How do you find my daughter?
Madam, I find her now what you would have her,
What the State wishes her; I urged her fault to her,
Opened her eyes, and made her see the mischief
She was running with a headlong will into,
Made her stait at her folly, shake and tremble,
At the mere memory of such an ignorance,
She now contemns his love, hates his remembrance,
Cannot endure to hear the name of Silvio;
His person spits at.
I am glad to hear this.
And humbly now to your will, your care, Madam,
Bends her affections, bows her best obedience;
Syennas Duke, with new eyes now she looks on,
And with a Princely love, sit for his person,
Returns that happiness and joy he looked for;
The general good of both the neighbour Dukedoms,
Not any private end, or rash affection
She aims at now: hearing the Duke arrived too,
(To whom she owes all honour, and all service,)
She charged me kneel thus at your Graces feet,
And not to rise without a general pardon.
She has it, and my love again, my old love,
And with more tenderness I meet this penitence,
Then if she ne'er had started from her honour;
I thank ye Rhodopc, am bound to thank ye,
And daily to remember this great service,
This honest faithful service; go in peace,
And by this Ring, delivered to Bartello,
Let her enjoy our favour, and her liberty,
And presently to this place, with all honour,
See her conducted.
Your Grace has made me happy. 
Syennas noble Duke, craves his admittance.
Go, wait upon his Grace; fair Sir, you are welcome,
Welcome to her ever admired your virtues:
And now, me thinks, my Court looks true nobly;
You have taken too much pains, Sir.
Royal Lady,
To wait upon your Grace is but my service.
Keep that Sir, for the Saint ye have vowed it to.
I keep a life for her: Since your Grace pleases
To jump so happily into the matter,
I come indeed to claim your royal promise,
The beauteous Belvidere in marriage,
I come to tender her my youth, my fortune,
My everlasting love.
You are like to win Sir:
All is forgot, forgiven too; no sadness
My good Child, you have the same heart still here,
The Duke of Syenna, Child, pray use him nobly.
An Angel beauty.
Your Grace is fairly welcome,
And what in modesty a blushing maid may
Wish to a Gentleman of your great goodness;
But wishes are too poor a pay for Princes.
You have made me richer then all States and Titles,
One kiss of this white hand's above all honours,
My faith dear Lady, and my fruitful service,
My duteous zeal—
Your Grace is a great Master,
And speak too powerfully to be resisted:
Once more you are welcome Sir, to me you are welcome,
To her that honours ye; I could say more Sir,
But in another tongue it were better spoken,
As wise as fair, you have made your Servant happy;
I never saw so rich a Mine of sweetness.
Will your Grace please, after your painful journey
To take some rest? Are the Dukes Lodgings ready?
All Madam.
Then wait upon his Grace, all, and to morrow Sir
We will show ye in what high esteem we hold ye,
Till then a fair repose.
My fairest service 
You have so honoured me, my dearest Daughter,
So truly pleased me in this entertainment,
I mean your loving carriage to Syenna,
That both for ever I forget all trespasses,
And to secure you next of my full favour,
Ask what you will within my power to grant ye,
Ask freely: and if I forget my promise—
Ask confidently.
You are too royal to me,
To me that have so foolishly transgressed you,
So like a Girl, so far forgot my virtue,
Which now appears as base and ugly to me,
As did his Dream, that thought he was in Paradise,
Awaked and saw the Devil; how was I wandered?
With what eyes could I look upon that poor, that course thing,
That wretched thing called Silvio? that (now) despised thing?
And lose an object of that graceful sweetness,
That god-like presence as Syenna is?
Darkness, and cheerful day had not such difference:
But I must ever bless your care, your wisdom,
That led me from this labyrinth of folly,
How had I sunk else? what example given?
Prithee no more, and as thou art my best one,
Ask something that may equal such a goodness.
Why did ye let him go so slightly from ye,
More like a man in triumph, then condemned?
Why did ye make his penance but a question,
A riddle, every idle wit unlocks.
It is not so,
Nor do not fear it so: he will not find it,
I have given that (unless my self discover it)
Will cost his head.
It is subject to construction?
That it is too.
It may be then absolved,
And then are we both scorned and laughed at, Madam;
Beside the promise you have tied upon it,
Which you must never keep.
I never meant it.
For heaven sake let me know it, it is my Suit to ye,
The Boon you would have me ask; let me but see it,
That if there be a way to maked so strong,
No wit nor powerful reason can run through it,
For my disgrace, I may beg of heaven to grant it.
Fear not, it has been put to sharper judgements
Then ere he shall arrive at: my dear Father,
That was as fiery in his understanding,
And ready in his wit as any living,
Had it two years; and studied it, yet lost it:
This night ye are my Bed-fellow, there Daughter
Into your bosom isle commit this secret,
And there we will both take counsel.
I shall find
Some trick I hope too strong yet for his mind. 
Methinks I am battened well of late, grown lusty,
Fat, high, and kicking, thanks to the bounteous Rugio;
And now, methinkes I scorn these poor repasts,
Cheese parings, and the stinking tongues of Pilchers;
But why should I remember these? they are odious,
They are odious in mine eyes; the full fat dish now,
The bearing dish is that I reverence,
The dish an able Serving-man sweats under,
And bends in the hams, as if the house hung on him,
That dish is the dish: hang your bladder Banquets,
Or half a dozen of Turnop, and two Mushrumps,
These when they breed their best, hatch but two Belches;
The state of a fat Turkey, the decorum
He marches in with, all the train and circumstance;
It is such a matter, such a glorious matter,
And then his sauce, with Oranges and Onions,
And he displayed in all parts, for such a dish now,
And at my need I would betray my father,
And for a roasted Conger, all my Country.
What my friend Lean-gut, how do's thy beauteous Mistress?
And whore's your Master Sir? whore's that horn-pipe?
My Mistress Sir, do's as a poor wronged Gentlewoman,
Too much heaven knows oppressed with injuries,
May do and live.
Is the old fool still jealous?
As old fools are, and will be still the same Sir.
He must have cause: he must have cause.
It is true Sir,
And would he had with all my heart.
He shall have.
For then he had Salt to his Saffron Porridge.
Why do not I see thee sometime? why thou starved rascal?
Why do not ye come to me, you precius bow-case?
I keep good meat at home, good store:
Yes Sir,
I will not fail ye all next week.
Thou art welcome,
I have a secret I would fine impart to thee,
But thou art so thin the wind will blow it from thee,
Or men will read it through thee.
Wrapped up in beef Sir,
In good gross beef, let all the world look on me,
The English have that trick to keep intelligence.
A witty knave, first there's to tie your tongue up,
Dumb as a Dog Sir.
Next, hark in your ear. Sir.
Well, very well, excellent well: it is done Sir,
Say no more to me.
Say and hold.
It is done Sir.
As thou love buttered eggs, swear.
Let me kiss the Book first,
But here's my hand, brave Captain.
Look ye hold, sir. 
O the most precious vanity of this world
When such dry Neats-tongues must be sok'd and larded
With young fat supple wenches? O the Devil,
What can he do, he cannot suck an egg off
But his back's loose in the hilts: go thy ways Captain,
Well may thy Warlike name work Miracles,
But if ever thy foundered courser win match more,
Or stand right but one train—
Now Seignior Shadow,
What art thou thinking of, how to rob thy Master?
Of his good deeds? the Thief that undetakes that
Must have a hook will pose all Hell to hammer:
Have ye dined Gentlemen, or do you purpose?
Dined, two long hours ago.
Pray ye take me with ye.
To supper dost thou mean?
To any thing
That has the smell of meat in it: tell me true, Gentlemen,
Are not you three now going to be sinful,
To jeabard a joint, or so? I have found your faces,
And see whore written in your eyes.
A parlous Rascal,
Thou art much upon the matter.
Have a care Gentlemen,
It is a sore age, very sore age, lewd age,
And women now are like old Knights adventures,
Full of enchanted flames, and dangerous.
Where the most danger is, there's most honour.
I grant ye, honour most consists in sufferance,
And by that rule you three should be most honourable.
A subtle Rogue: but can thou tell Penurio
Where we might light upon—
A learned Surgeon?
Pox take ye fool; I mean good wholesome wenches.
Faith wholesome women will but spoil ye too,
For you are so used to snap-haunces: But take my counsel,
Take fat old women, fat, and five and fifty,
The Dog-dayes are come in.
Take fat old women?
The fatter and the older, still the better,
You do not know the pleasure of an old Dame,
A fat old Dame, you do not know the knack on it:
They are like our Country grotes, as cool as Christmas,
And sure in the keels.
Hang him starved fool, he mocks us.
Penurio, thou know all the handsome wenches?
What shall I give thee for a Merchants wife now?
I take no money Gentlemen, that's base,
I trade in meat, a Merchants wife will cost ye
A glorious Capon, a great shoulder of Mutton,
And a Tart as big as a Conjurers circle.
That's cheap enough.
And what a Haberdashers?
Worse meat will serve for her: a great Goose Pie,
But you must send it out of the Country to me,
It will not do else: with a piece of Bacon,
And if you can a pot of Butter with it.
Now do I aim at horse-flesh: what a Parsons?
A tithe Pig has no fellow, if I fetch her,
If she be Puritan, Plumb-porridge do's it,
And a fat loin of Veale well sauced and roasted.
We'll meet one night, and thou shalt have all these,
Of that condition we may have the wenches,
A dainty rascal.
When your stomachs serve ye,
(For mine is ever ready) isle supply ye.
Farewell, and there's to fill thy paunch.
Brave Gentleman.
Hold sirrah, there.
Any young wench in the Town Sir.
It shall go round. 
Most honourable Gentlemen,
All these are Courtiers, but they are mere Coxcombs,
And only for a wench, their purses open,
Nor have they so much judgement left to choose her;
If ever they call upon me isle so fit 'em,
I have a pack of wry-mouth'd mackrel Ladies,
Stink like a standing ditch, and those dear Damsels;
But I forgot my business, I thank ye Mounsieurs,
I have a thousand whimsies in my brains now. 
Your Grace shall now perceive how much we honour ye
And in what dear regard we hold your friendship
Will you sit Sir, and grace this homely Banquet?
Madam, to your poor friend you are too magnificent.
To the Dukes health, and all the joys I wish him,
Let no man miss this cup: have we no Music?
Your noble favours still you heap upon me,
But whore's my virtuous Mistress, such a Feast,
And not her sparkling beauty here to bless it?
Me thinks it should not be, it shows not fully.
Young Ladies Sir, are long, and curious
In putting on their trims, forget how day goes,
And then it is their good morrow when they are ready:
Go some and call her, and wait upon her hither,
Tell her the Duke and I desire her company:
I warrant ye, a hundred dressings now
She has surveyed, this, and that fashion looked on,
For Ruffs and Gowns; cast this away, these Jewels
Suited to these and these knots: of my life Sir,
She fears your curious eye will soon discover else:
Why stand ye still, why gape ye on one another?
Did I not bid ye go and tell my Daughter?
Are ye nailed here? nor stir? nor speak? who am I,
And who are you?
Pardon me, gracious Lady,
The fear to tell you that you would not hear of
Makes us all dumb, the Princess is gone, Madam.
Gone? whither gone? some wiser fellow answer me.
We sought the Court all over, and believe Lady,
No news of where she is, nor how conveyed hence.
It cannot be, it must not be.
It is true Madam,
No room in all the Court but we searched through it,
Her women found her want first, and they cried to us.
Gone? stolen away? I am abused, dishonoured.
It is I that am abused, it is I dishonoured,
Is this your welcome, this your favour to me?
To foist a trick upon me, this trick too,
To cheat me of my love? Am I not worthy?
Or since I was your Guest, am I grown odious?
Your Grace mistakes me, as I have a life, Sir.
And I another, I will never bear this,
Never endure this dor.
But hear me patiently.
Give me my love.
As soon as care can find her,
And all care shall be used.
And all my care too,
To be revenged; I smell the trick, it is too rank,
Fie, how it smells of the Mother.
You wrong me, Duke.
For this disgrace ten thousand Florentines
Shall pay their dearest bloods, and dying curse ye,
And so I turn away, your mortal enemy. 
Since ye are so high and hot Sir, ye have half armed us,
Be careful of the Town, of all the Castles,
And see supplies of Soldiers every where,
And Musters for the Field, when he invites us,
For he shall know it is not high words can fright us.
My Daughter gone? has she so finely cozened me?
This is for Silvio's sake sure, O cunning false one;
Publish a Proclamation thorough the Dukedom.
That whosoe're can bring to the Court young Silvio,
Alive or dead, beside our thanks and favour,
Shall have two thousand Ducats for his labour;
See it dispatched, and sent in haste: O base one. 
Was it thou with Rugio?
Yes marry was I closely.
And do's he still remember his poor Mistress?
Do's he desire to see me?
Yes, and presently:
Puts off all business else, lives in that memory,
And will be here according to directions.
But whore's thy Master?
Where a coxcomb should be,
Waiting at Court with his Jewels,
Safe for this night I warrant ye.
I am bound to thee.
I would ye were; as close as I could tie ye,
Thou art my best, my truest friend.
I labour,
I moil and toil for ye: I am your hackney.
If ever I be able—
Steal the great Cheese Mistress,
Was sent him out of the Country.
Any thing.
That's meat, it is lawful Mistress: whore's the Castle Custard
He got at Court?
He has locked it in's study.
Get a warrant to search for counterfeit gold.
Give me thy Candle,
Isle find a time to be thy careful Cater.
And many a time Isle find to be his Cook,
And dress his Calves head to the sweetest sauce Mistress.
To bed Penurio, go, the rest is my charge,
Isle keep the Watch out.
Now if you spare him— 
Peace fool,
I hope my Rugio will not fail, it would vex me:
Now to my string; so, sure he cannot miss now,
And this end to my finger: isle lye down,
For on a sudden I am wondrous heavy,
It is very late too; if he come, and find this,
And pull it, though it be with easy motion
I shall soon waken, and as soon be with him.
Thou secret friend, how am I bound to love thee,
And how to hug thee for thy private service?
Thou art the Star all my suspicions sail by,
The fixed point my wronged honour turns to,
By thee I shall know all, find all the subtilties
Of devilish women, that torment me daily:
Thou art my Conjurer, my Spell, my Spirit,
Ell's hushed and still, no sound of any stirring,
No tread of living thing: the Light is in still,
And there's my wife, how prettily the fool lies,
How sweet, and handsomely, and in her clothes too,
Waiting for me upon my life; her fondness
Would not admit her rest till I came to her:
O careful fool, why am I angry with thee?
Why do I think thou hat'st thy loving Husband?
I am an Ass, an over-doating Coxcomb,
And this sweet soul the mirror of perfection:
How admirable fair and delicate,
And how it stirs me, isle sing thy sweets a Requiem,
But will not waken thee.
O Fair sweet face, O eyes celestial bright,
Twin-stars in Heaven that now adorn the night;
O fruitful lips, where Cherries ever grow,
And Damask cheeks, where all sweet beauties blow;
O thou from head to foot divinely fair,
Cupids most cunning Nets made of that hair,
And as he weaves himself for curious eyes,
O me, O me, I am caught my self, he cries:
Sweet rest about this sweets and golden sleep,
Soft peaceful thoughts your how' rely watches keep,
Whilst I in wonder sing this sacrifice,
To beauty sacred, and those Angell-eyes.
Now will I steal a kiss, a dear kiss from her,
And suck the Rosie breath of this bright beauty;
What a Devil is this? tied to her finger too?
A string, a damned string to give intelligence
O my loved key, how truly has'st thou served me;
Isle follow this: soft, soft, to the door it goes,
And through to the other side; a damned string it is,
I am abused, topped, Cuckolded, fooled, jaded,
Ridden to death, to madness; stay, this helps not:
Stay, stay, and now invention help me,
Isle sit down by her, take this from her easily,
And thus upon mine own: Dog, I shall catch ye,
With all your cunning Sir: I shall light on ye,
I felt it pull sure: yes, but wondrous softly,
It is there again, and harder now, have at ye:
Now and thou scap'st, the Devils thy ghostly father. 
Sure it was my Husbands voice: The string is gone to,
He has found the trick on it: I am undone, betrayed,
And if he meet my friend he perishes,
What fortune follows me, what spiteful fortune?
Hoe, Jaquenet.
Here Mistress, do you call me?
Did thou hear no noise?
I hear my Master mad yonder,
And swears, and chafes—
Dare thou do one thing for me?
One thing concerns mine honour, all is lost else?
Name what you will.
It can bring but a beating,
Which I will recompense so largely—
Name it.
Sit here, as if thou were asleep.
Is that all?
When he comes in, what ever he do unto thee
(The worst will be but beating) speak not a word,
Not one word as thou love me.
Isle run through it.
Isle carry away the Candle. 
And I the blows Mistress.
Have you put your light out? I shall stumble to ye,
You whore, you cunning whore, I shall catch your rogue to,
Has light legs else: I had so Ferret-claw'd him:
O have I found ye? do ye play at dog-sleep still whore?
Do you think that can protect ye? yes, I will kill thee,
But first isle bring thy friends to view thy villainies,
Thy whorish villainies: and first isle beat thee,
Beat thee to pin-dust, thou salt whore, thou varlet,
Scratch out thine eyes; isle spoil your tempting visage;
Are ye so patient? isle put my nails in deeper,
Is it good whoring? whoring ye base rascal?
Is it good tempting men with strings to ride ye?
So, isle fetch your kindred, and your friends, whore,
And such a Justice I will act upon thee. 
What is he gone?
The Devil go with him Mistress,
Has harrowed me, ploughed land was ne'er so harrowed:
I had the most ado to save mine eyes.
Has paid thee,
But isle heal all again with good gold Jaquenet;
Has damned nails.
They are ten-penny nails I think Mistress:
Isle undertake he shall strike 'em through an inch board.
Go up, and wash thy self: take my Pomatum,
And now let me alone to end the Tragedy.
You had best beware.
I shall deal stoutly with him,
Reach me my book, and see the door made fast wench,
And so good night: now to the matter politic.
You shall see what she is, what a sweet jewel.
Who's there, what mad-man knocks? is this an hour
And in mine husbands absence?
Will ye open?
You know my voice ye whore, I am that husband:
Do you mark her subtlety? but I have paid her,
I have so forked her face: here's the blood Gentlemen,
Ass signum: I have spoiled her Goatish beauty,
Observe her how she looks now, how she is painted,
O it is the most wicked'st whore, and the most treacherous
Here walks my Cousin full of meditation,
Armed with religious thoughts.
Is this the monster?
Is this the subject of that rage you talked of,
That naughty woman you had pulled a pieces?
Here's no such thing.
How have ye wronged this beauty?
Are not you mad my friend? what time of the Moon is it?
Have not you Maggots in your brains?
It is she sure.
Whore's the scratched face ye spoke of, the torn garments,
And all the hair plucked off her head?
Believe me,
It were better far you had lost your pair of pebbles,
Then she the least adornment of that sweetness.
Is not this blood?
This is a monstrous folly,
A base abuse.
Thus he do's ever use me,
And sticks me up a wonder, not a woman,
Nothing I do but subject to suspicion;
Nothing I can do able to content him.
Lopes, you must not use this.
It were not amiss Sir,
To give ye sauce to your meat, and suddenly.
You that dare wrong a woman of her goodness,
Thou have a wife, thou have a Bear tied to thee,
To scratch thy jealous itch, were all of my mind,
I mean all women, we would soon disburden ye
Of that that breeds these fits, these dog-flawes in ye,
A Sow-guelder should trim ye.
A rare cure Lady,
And one as fit for him as a Thief for a halter,
You see this youth: will you not cry him quittance,
Body' me, I would pine, but I would pepper him,
Isle come anon, he, hang him, poor pompillion:
How like a wench bepist he looks, isle come Lady:
Lopes, the Law must teach ye what a wife is,
A good, a virtuous wife.
Isle ne'er live with him,
I crave your loves all to make known my cause,
That so a fair Divorce may pass between us,
I am weary of my life: in danger hourly.
You see how rude you are, I will not miss ye,
Unsufferable rude: isle pay him soundly,
You should be whipped in Bedlam: isle reward him.
Whipping's too good.
I think I am alive still,
And in my wits.
Isle put a trick upon him,
And get his goods Confiscate: you shall have 'em;
I will not fail at nine.
I think I am here too,
And once I would have sworn I had taken her napping,
I think my name is Lopes.
Fie for shame Sir,
You see you have abused her, foully wronged her,
Hung scandalous and course opinions on her,
Which now you find but children of suspicion:
Ask her forgiveness, show a penitence,
She is my Kins-woman, and what she suffers
Under so base and beastly jealousies,
I will redress else, isle seek satisfaction.
Why, every Boy in the Town will peace upon thee.
I am sorry for it.
Down of your marrow-bones.
Even sorry from my heart: forgive me sweet wife,
Here I confess most freely I have wronged ye,
As freely here I beg a pardon of ye,
From this hour no debate, no cross suspicion—
To show ye Sir I understand a wives part,
Thus I assure my love, and seal your pardon.
It is well done, now to bed and there confirm it.
And so good night.
Aware relapses, Lopes. 
Now Isabella tell me truth, and suddenly,
And do not juggle with me, nor dissemble,
For as I have a life ye dye then: I am not mad,
Nor do's the Devil work upon my weakness,
Tell me the trick of this, and tell me freely.
Will then that satisfy ye?
If ye deal ingenuously.
Isle tell ye all, and tell ye true and freely,
Bartello was the end of all this jealousy,
His often visitations brought by you, first
Bred all these fits, and these suspicions:
I knew your false key, and accordingly
I framed my plot, to have him take him finely,
Too poor a penance for the wrong his wife bears,
His worthy virtuous wife: I felt it sensibly
When ye took off the string, and was much pleased in it,
Because I wished his importunate dotage paid well,
And had you staid two minutes more, ye had had him.
This sounds like truth.
Because this shall be certain,
Next time he comes, as long he cannot tarry,
Your self shall see, and hear, his lewd temptations.
Till then I am satisfied, and if this prove true,
Henceforward Mistress of your self I give ye,
And I to serve ye: For my lusty Captain,
Isle make him dance, and make him think the Devil
Claws at his breech, and yet I will not hurt him:
Come now to bed, and prove but constant this way,
Isle prove the man you ever wished.
You have blessed me. 
WHat labour and what travel have I run Through?
And through what Cities to absolve this Riddle?
Diviners, Dreamers, Schoolmen, deep Magicians,
All have I tried, and all give several meanings,
And from all hope of any future happiness,
To this place am I come at length, the country,
The people simple, plain, and harmless witty,
Whose honest labours Heaven rewards with plenty
Of Corn, Wine, Oil, which they again, as thankful,
To their new Cropps, new pastimes celebrate,
And crown their joyful harvests with new voices;
By a rich farmer here I am entertained,
And rank't among the number of his Servants,
Not guessing what I am, but what he would have me,
Here may be so much wit (though much I fear it)
To undo this knotty question; and would to Heaven
My fortunes had been hatched with theirs, as innocent,
And never known a pitch above their plainness.
That it is, that it is, what's this word now? this
Is a plaguy word, that it is, r. e. a. that it is, reason,
By your leave, Mr. Soto, by your leave, you are too quick, Sir,
Ther's a strange par'lous T. hefore the reason,
A very tall T. which makes the word High Treason.
What Treason's that? do's this fellow understand Himself?
Pitch will infect, isle meddle no more with this gear;
What a Devil ails this fellow? this foolish fellow,
Being admitted to be one of us too,
That are the masters of the Sports proceeding,
Thus to appear, before me too, unmorriss'd?
Do you know me friend?
You are my Matters Son, Sir.
And do you know what sports are now in season?
I hear there are some a foot.
Where are your Bells then?
Your Rings, your Ribanes, friend? &amp; your clean Napkins?
Your nosegay in your hat, pinned up, am not I here?
My fathers eldest Son, and at this time, Sir,
I would have ye know it, though ye be ten times his servant,
A better man then my father far, Lord of this Harvest, Sir,
And shall a man of my place want attendance?
It was want of knowledge, Sir, not duty, bred this,
I would have made suit else for your Lordships service.
In some sort I am satisfied now, mend your manners,
But thou art a melancholy fellow, veng'ance melancholy,
And that may breed a insurrection amongst us;
Go too, Isle lay the best part of two pots now
Thou art in love, and I can guess with whom too,
I saw the wench that twir'd and twinkled at thee,
The other day; the wench that's new come hither,
The young smug wench.
You know more then I feel Sir.
Go too, Isle be thy friend, isle speak a good word for thee,
And thou shalt have my Lordships countenance to her;
May be I have had a snap my self, may be I, may be no,
We Lords are allowed a little more.
It is fit Sir;
I humbly thank ye, you are too too tender of me,
But what Sir, I beseech ye, was that paper,
Your Lordship was so studiously Employed in,
When ye came out a doors?
Thou meanest this paper.
That Sir, I think.
Why, it is a Proclamation,
A notable piece of villainy, as ever thou heard in thy life,
By mine honour it is.
How Sir? or what concerns it?
It comes ye from the Duchess, a plaguy wise woman,
To apprehend the body of one Silvio,
As arrant a Rascal as ever pissed against post,
And this same Silvio, or this foresaid rascal,
To bring before her, live or dead; for which good service
The man that brings him, has two thousand Ducats;
Is not this notable matter now?
It is so indeed,
This Proclamation bears my bane about it;
Can no rest find me? no private place secure me?
But still my miseries like blood-hounds haunt me?
Unfortunate young man, which way now guides thee,
Guides thee from death? the Countrey's laid round for thee;
O Claudio, now I feel thy blood upon me,
Now it speaks loudly here, I am sure against me,
Time now has found it out, and truth proclaimed it,
And Justice now cries out, I must die for it.
Hast thou read it?
Yes.
And dost thou know that Silvio.
I never saw him, Sir.
I have, and know him too,
I know him as well as I know thee, and better,
And if I light upon him, for a trick he plaid me once,
A certain kind of dog-trick, isle so fiddle him,
Two thousand Ducats, isle so pepper him,
And with that money isle turn Gentleman,
Worth a browne Bakers dozen of such Silvio's.
There is no staying here, this rogue will know me,
And for the money sake betray me too;
I must bethink me suddenly and safely.
Mine own dear Lady, have at thy honey-comb,
Now, for the honour of our Town, Boys, trace sweetly,
What a vengeance ails this whobub? pox refuse 'em,
Cannot they let us dance in our own defence here?
Arm, honest friends, arm suddenly &amp; bravely,
And with your ancient resolutions follow me;
Look how the Beacons show like comets, your poor neighbours
Run maddingly affrighted through the Villages;
Syennas Duke is up, burns all before him,
And with his sword, makes thousand mothers childless,
What's this to our Morrisdancers?
This may serve my turn.
Theres ne'er a Duke in Christendom but loves a May-game.
At a Horse you were always ceased, put your Son on him,
And arm him well in the States name, I command ye;
And they that dare go voluntary, shall receive reward.
I dare go no way, Sir, this is strange, Master Captain,
You cannot be content to spoil our sport here,
Which I do not think your Worship's able to answer,
But you must set us together by the ears, with I know not who to?
We are for the bodily part of the dance.
Arm him suddenly,
This is no time to fool, I shall return ye else,
A rebel to the General, State, and Duchess,
And how you'll answer then—
I have no more Sons, Sir,
This is my only boy; I beseech ye Master Captain.
I am a rank coward too, to say the truth, Sir,
I never had good luck at buffets neither.
Here's forty shillings, spare the child.
I cannot.
Are ye a man? will ye cast away a May-Lord?
Shall all the wenches in the Country curse ye?
An't please you Captain, isle supply his person,
It is pity their old custom should be frighted,
Let me have Horse, and good Arms, isle serve willingly,
And if I shrink a foot of ground, Hell take me.
A promising aspect, face full of courage,
Isle take this man, and thank ye too.
Ther's for thee,
It is in a clout, but good old gold.
I thank ye Sir.
Go saddle my fore-horse, put his feather on too,
He will prance it bravely, friend, he fears no Colours,
And take the Armour down, and see him dizened,
Farewell, &amp; if thou carry thy self well in this matter,
I say no more, but this, there must be more May-Lords,
And I know who are sit.
Dance you, Isle fight, Sir,
Away, away.
Farewell, I am for the Captain. 
Now to this matter again, my honest fellows,
For if this go not forward, I foresee friends,
This war will fright our neighbours out of the villages;
Cheer up your hearts, we shall hear better news, boys.
Surely, I will dance no more, it is most ridiculous,
I find my wives instructions now mere verities,
My learned wives, she often hath pronounced to me
My safety Bomby, defy these sports, thou art damned else,
This Beast of Babylon, I will never back again,
His pace is sure profane, and his lewd wihies
The Sons of Hymyn, and Gymyn, in the wilderness.
Fie neighbour Bomby, in your fits again,
Your zeal swets, this is not careful, neighbour,
The Hobby-Horse, is a seemly Hobby-Horse.
And as pretty a Beast on's inches, though I say it.
The Beast is an unseemly, and a lewd Beast,
And got at Rome by the Popes Coach-Horses,
His mother was the Mare of ignorance.
Cobbler, thou lie, and thou were a thousand Cobblers,
His mother was an honest Mare, &amp; a Mare of good credit,
I know the Mare, and if need be, can bring witness;
And in the way of honesty I tell thee,
Scorned any Coach-Horse the Pope had, thou art foolish,
And thy blind zeal makes thee abuse the Beast.
I do defy thee, and thy foot-cloth too,
And tell thee to thy face, this prophaine riding
I feel it in my conscience, and I dare speak it,
This unedified ambling, hath brought a scourge upon us,
This Hobby-horse sincerity we lived in
War, and the sword of slaughter: I renounce it,
And put the Beast off; thus, the Beast polluted,
And now no more shall hope on high Bomby,
Follow the painted Pipes of worldly pleasures,
And with the wicked dance the Devils measures;
Away thou pampered jade of vanity,
Stand at the Livery of lewd delights now,
And eat the provender of prickear'd folly,
My dance shall be to the pipe of persecution.
Will you dance no more Neighbour?
Surely no,
Carry the Beast to his Crib: I have renounced him,
And all his works.
Shall the Hobby-horse be forgot then?
The hopeful Hobby-horse? shall he lye foundered?
If thou dost this, thou art but a cast-away Cobbler:
My anger's up, think wisely, and think quickly,
And look upon the quondam beast of pleasure,
If thou dost this (mark me, thou serious Sowter)
Thou Bench-whistler of the old tribe of toe-peeces,
If thou dost this there shall be no more Shooe-mending,
Every man shall have a special care of his own soul:
And in his pocket carry his two Confessors,
His Yugell, and his Nawle: if thou dost this—
He will dance again for certain.
I cry out on it,
It was the fore-running sin brought in those Tilt-staves,
They brandish against the Church, the Devil calls May-poles,
Take up your Horse again, and girth him to ye,
And girth him handsomely good neighbour Bomby.
I spit at him.
Spit in the Horse face, Cobbler?
Thou out of tune-Psalm-singing Slave; spit in his visnomy?
I spit again, and thus I rise against him:
Against this Beast: that signified destruction,
Fore-shew'd in the falls of Monarchies.
In the face of him?
Spit such another spit, by this hand Cobbler
Isle make ye set a new piece of your nose there,
'Tak't up I say, and dance without more bidding,
And dance as you were wont: you have been excellent
And art still, but for this new nicety,
And your wives learned Lectures: take up the Hobby-horse
Come, it is a thing thou hast loved with all thy heart Bomby
And would do still but for the round-breecht Brothers:
You were not thus in the morning, tak't up I say,
Do not delay but do it: you know I am officer,
And I know it is unfit all these good fellows
Should wait the cooling of your zealous porridge;
Choose whether you will dance, or have me execute:
Isle clap your nook in the Stocks, and there isle make ye
Dance a whole day, and dance with these at night too,
You mend old Shoes well, mend your old manners better,
And suddenly see you leave off this sincerenesse.
This new hot batch borrowed from some brown Baker,
Some learned Brother, or isle so bait ye for it,
Take it quickly up.
I take my persecution,
And thus I am forced a by-word to my Brethren.
Strike up, strike up: strike merrily.
To it roundly,
Now to the harvest feast: then sport again Boys. 
What shall I do? live thus unknown, and base still?
Or thrust my self into the head of the Battle?
And there, like that I am, a Gentleman,
And one that never feared the face of danger,
(So in her angry eyes she carried honour)
Fight nobly, and (to end my cares) dye nobly?
SIlvio go on, and raise thy noble mind
To noble ends; fling course base thoughts behind:
Silvio, thou Son of everliving fame,
Now aim at virtue, and a Noble Name.
Silvio consider, Honour is not won,
Nor virtue reached, till some brave thing be done:
Thy Country calls thee now; she burns, and bleeds,
Now raise thy self, young man, to noble deeds.
Into the Battle Silvio, there seek forth
Danger, and blood, by them stands sacred worth.
What heavenly voice is this that follows me?
This is the second time 't has waited on me,
Since I was armed, and ready for the Battle;
It names me often, steeles my heart with courage,
And in a thousand sweet notes comforts me;
What Beldom's this? how old she is, and ugly,
Why do's she follow me?
Be not dismayed, Son,
I wait upon thee, for thy good, and honour,
It was I that now sung to thee, stirred thy mind up,
And raised thy spirits to the pitch of nobleness.
Though she be old, and of a crooked carcass,
Her voice is like the harmony of Angels.
Thou art my darling, all my love dwells on thee
The Son of virtue, therefore I attend thee;
Enquire not what I am, I come to serve thee,
For if thou be inquisitive, thou hast lost me:
A thousand long miles hence my dwelling is,
Deep in a Cave, where but mine own, no foot treads,
There by mine Art, I found what danger (Silvio)
And deep distress of heart, thou were grown into,
A thousand leagues I have cut through empty air,
Far swifter then the sailing tack that gallops
Upon the wings of angry winds, to seek thee.
Sometimes 'ore a swelling tide, on a Dolphins back I ride,
Sometimes pass the earth below, and through the unmoved Center go;
Sometimes in a flame of fire, like a Meteor I aspire,
Sometimes in mine own shape, thus, when I help the virtuous,
Men of honourable minds, command my Art in all his kinds;
Pursue the noble thought of war, from thy Guard isle not be far,
Get thee worship on thy foe, lasting fame is gotten so.
Single Syennas Duke alone, hear thy friends, thy Country groan,
And with thy manly arm strike sure, then thou hast wrought thine own free cure.
Some Sybell sure, some soul heaven loves, and favours.
And lends her their free powers, to work their wonders?
How she incites my courage?
Silvio,
I knew thee many days a go,
Foresaw thy love to Belvidere, the Duchess Daughter, and her Heir;
Knew she loved thee, and know what past, when you were found in the Castle fast
In one another arms; foresaw the taking of ye, and the Law;
And so thy innocence I loved, the deepest of my skill I proved;
Be ruled by me, for to this hour I have dwelt about thee with my power.
I will, and in the course of all observe thee,
For thou art sure an Angel good sent to me.
Get thee gone then to the fight, longer stay but robs thy right;
When thou grow weary isle be near, then think on beauteous Belvidere,
For every precious thought of her, isle lend thine honour a new spur;
When all is done, meet here at night; Go and be happy in the fight. 
I certainly believe I shall do nobly,
And that Isle bravely reach at too, or die. 
Is she so loving still?
She is mad with love,
As mad as ever unworm'd dog was, Signior,
And do's so weep, and curse, for your prevention,
Your crosses in your love; it frets me too,
I am fallen away to nothing, to a spindle,
Grown a mere man of mat, no soul within me,
Pox of my Master, Sir, will that content ye?
This rogue but cozens me, and she neglects me,
Upon my life there are some other gamsters,
Nearer the wind then I, and that prevents me,
Is there no other holds acquaintance with her?
Prithee be true, be honest, do not mock me,
Thou know her heart, no former interest
She has vowed a favour to? and cannot handsomely
Go off, but by regaining such a friendship?
There are a thousand handsome men, young, wealthy,
That will not stick at any rate, nor danger,
To gain so sweet a prize; nor can I blame her,
If where she finds a comfort she deal cunningly,
I am a stranger yet.
Ye are all she looks for,
And if there be any other, she neglects all,
And all for you: I would you saw how grievously
And with what hourly lamentations.
I know thou flatter me; tell me but truth,
Look here, look well, the best meat in the Dukedom,
The rarest, and the choicest of all diets,
This will I give thee, but to satisfy me;
That is, not to dissemble; this rare Lobster,
This Pheasant of the sea, this dish for Princes,
And all this thou shalt enjoy, eat all thy self,
Have good Greek wine, or any thing belongs to it,
A wench if it desire one.
All this, Signior?
All, and a greater far then this.
A greater?
If thou deserve by telling truth.
A wench too?
Or any thing, but if you play the knave now,
The Cozening knave besides the loss of this,
In which thou hast parted with a paradise,
I near will give thee meat more, not a morsel,
No smell of meat by my means shall come near thee,
Nor name of any thing that's nourishing,
But to thy old part Tantalus again,
Thou shalt return, and there snap at a shadow.
Upon this point, had I intended Treason,
Or any thing might call my life in question,
Followed with all the tortures time could think on,
Give me but time to eat this lovely Lobster,
This Alderman of the Sea, and give me wine to him,
I would reveal all, and if that all were too little,
More then I knew; Bartello holds in with her,
The Captain of the Citadel, but you need not fear him,
His tongue's the stiffest weapon that he carries.
He is old, and out of use; there are some other,
Men young enough, handsome, and bold enough,
Could they come to make their game once; but they want Sir,
They want the unde quare, they are laid by then,
You only are the man shall knock the nail in—
How now Penurio?
Your Worship's fairly met, Sir.
You shall hear further from me, steal aside Sir.
Remember your Master for those Chains.
They are ready, Sir.
What young thing's this? by his habit hoe's a Merchant;
I fear he trades my way too, you dried dog-fish,
What bait was that?
Who Sir, the thing went hence now?
A notable young whelp.
To what end Sirrah?
Came to buy Chains and Rings, is to be married,
An Ass, a Coxcomb, has nothing in his house, Sir;
I warrant you think he came to see my Mistress?
I doubt it shrewdly.
Away, away, it is foolish;
He has not the face to look upon a Gentlewoman,
A poor skimmed thing, his Mothers maids are fine, Sir,
To teach him how to kiss, and against he is married,
To show him on which side the stirrup stands.
That's a fine youth.
Thou would hang thy self, that thou had half his power,
Thou empty Potgun.
Am I come fit Penurio?
As fit as a fiddle,
My Matter's now abroad about his business.
When thou came to me home to day, I half suspected
My wife was jealous, that she whispered to thee.
You deserve well the whilst, ther's no such matter,
She talked about some toys my Master must bring to her,
You must not know of.
Isle take note, Penurio.
No, Nor you shall not, till you have it soundly.
This is the bravest Capitano Pompo,
But I shall pump ye anon Sir.
O my Bartello?
Ye pretty Rogue, you little Rogue, you sweet Rogue,
Away Penurio, go and walk in the Horse-Fayre.
You do not love me?
Thou lie thou little Rascal;
There Sirrah, to your Sentry.
How the Colt itches?
Isle help ye to a Curry-comb shall claw ye. 
And how much dost thou love me?
Let's go in quickly,
Isle tell thee presently, isle measure it to thee.
No busses first? sit 'o my knee, my brave boy,
My valiant boy; do not look so fiercely on me,
Thou wilt fright me with thy face; come bus again Chick,
Smile in my face you mad thing.
I am mad indeed wench,
Precious I am all of fire.
Isle warrant thee better.
Isle warm thee too, or isle blow out my bellows;
Ha, ye sweet rogue, you loving rogue, a Boy now,
A Soldier I will get shall prove a fellow.
Mistress, look to your self, my Master's coming.
The Devil come, and go with him.
The Devil's come indeed, he brings your wife, Sir.
We are undone, undone then.
My wife with him?
Why this is a dismal day.
They are hard by too, Sir.
I must not, dare not see her.
Nor my Husband,
For twenty thousand pound.
That I were a Cat now,
Or any thing could run into a Bench-hole,
Saint Anthonies Fire upon the Rogue has brought her;
Where shall I be? just in the nick of the matter?
When I had her at my mercy: think for heaven sake,
My wife, all the wilde furies hell has.
Up the Chimney.
They'll smoke me out there presently.
There, there, it must be there,
We are all undone else: it must be up the Chimney.
Give me a Ladder.
You must use your Art Sir,
Alas, we have no Ladders.
Pox of thy husband,
Do's he never mend his house?
No, nor himself neither:
Up nimbly Sir, up nimbly.
Thou know I am fat,
Thou merciless lean Rogue.
Will ye be killed?
For if he take ye—
Lend me thy shoulder.
Soft Sir,
You'll tread my shoulder-bones into my sides else,
Have ye fast hold of the bars?
A vengeance bar 'em.
Patience good Captain, patience: quickly, quickly.
Do you think I am made of smoke?
Now he talks of smoke,
What if my Master should call for fire?
Will ye Martyr me?
He must needs have it.
Will ye make me Bacon?
We will do the best we can, are all things ready?
All, all, I have 'em all.
Go, let 'em in then,
Not a word now on your life.
I hang like a Meteor.
You are welcome Lady.
You are too too courteous,
But I shall make amends, fair Isabella.
Welcome my worthy friend, most kindly welcome.
I hear on it, and isle fit him for his foolery.
Some sweet meats wife: some sweet meats presently.
O my sour sauce.
Away quick Isabella. 
Did you hear him?
Yes, yes, perfectly, proceed Sir.
Speak loud enough: Dare ye at length but pity me?
Faith Sir, you have used so many reasons to me,
And those so powerfully—
Keep this kiss for me.
And do I stand and hear this?
This for me Sir,
This is some comfort now: Alas my Husband—
But why Do I think of so poor a fellow,
So wretched, so debauched?
That's I, I am bound to hear it.
I dare not lye with him, he is so rank a Whore-master.
And that's a dangerous point.
Upon my conscience Sir,
He would stick a thousand base diseases on me.
And now must I say nothing.
I am sound Lady.
That's it that makes me love ye.
Let's kiss again then.
Do, do.
Do, the Devil.
And the grand Pox do with ye.
Do ye hear him? well—
Now, what's the news with you?
The sound of War Sir,
Comes still along: The Duke will charge the City,
We have lost they say.
What shall become of me then,
And my poor wealth?
Even hanged, I hope.
Remove your Jewels presently,
And what you have of wealth into the Citadel,
I here ell's secure.
I humbly thank ye Lady:
Penurio, get me some can climb the Chimney,
For there my Jewels are, my best, my richest,
I hid 'em, fearing such a blow.
Most happily:
I have two Boys, that use to sweep fouled Chimneys,
Truly I brought 'em Sir, to mock your worship,
For the great Fires ye keep, and the full diet.
I forgive thee knave, where are they?
Here Sir, here:
Monsieur Black will your small worship mount?
Madam è be com to creep up into your Chimney, and make you. 
Clean, as any Lady in de world: Ma little, little frera, and è,
Chanta, frere, chanta.
Come Monsieur, mount, mountè, mount Monsieur Musterd-pot. 
Monsieur è have dis for votra barb, ple ta von Monsieur.
Mòunte Monsieur, mountè dere be some fine tings.
Me will creep like de Ferret Monsieur.
Dere in the Chimney. 
He be de shield due shauson, Madam.
There's a Birds-neast, I wound have ye climb it Monsieur,
Up my fine singing Monsieur: that's a fine Monsieur.
Watch him, he do not steal.
I warrant ye Sir.
These Boys are knavish. 
Isle look to him tithly
Lord, what comes here, 
A walking apparition?
Saint Christopher.
Mercy of me, what is it?
How like my Husband it looks?
Get ye down Devil,
Isle break your neck else: was ever man thus chimnied?
Go pay the Boys well: see them satisfied.
Come Monsieur Devils, come my Black-berries
Isle butter ye of both sides.
Nay, even look Sir, are you cooled now, Captain?
I am Cuckolled, and fooled to boot too:
Fooled fearfully, fooled shamefully.
You are welcome Sir,
I am glad I have any thing within these doors Sir
To make ye merry; you love my wife, I thank ye,
You have showed your love.
Wife, am I this? this odd matter,
This monstrous thing?
You ought, but yet you are not:
I have been bold with you Sir, but yet not basely,
As I have faith I have not.
Sir, believe it;
It was all meant but to make you feel your trespass;
We new your hour, and all this fashioned for it.
Were you of the plot too?
Yes by my troth, sweet Captain.
You will forgive me wife?
You will deserve it?
Put that to the venture.
Thus am I friends again then,
And as you ne'er had gone astray, thus kiss ye.
And isle kiss you, and you too ask forgiveness;
Kiss my wife Lopes, it is but in jest remember;
And now all friends together to my Castle,
Where we will all dine, and there discourse these stories,
And let him be Chimney-swept in's lust that glories. 
Hail reverent Dame, heaven wait upon thy studies.
You are well met Son: what is the Battle ended?
Mother, it is done.
How has thy honour prospered?
The Duchess has the day, Syenna's Prisoner:
Armed with thy powerful Art, this arm dismounted him,
Received him then on foot, and in fair valour
Forced him mine own, this Jewel I took from him,
It hung upon his cask, the Victors triumph:
And to the Duchess now a Prisoner
I have rendered him: Come off again unknown, Mother.
It is well done, let me see he jewel Son;
It is a rich one, curious set, fit a Princess Burgonet:
This rich token late was sent, by the Duchess with intent
The Marriage next day to begin: Dost thou know what's hid within?
Wipe thine eyes, and then come near, see the beauteous Belvidere:
Now behold it.
O my Saint.
We are it nobly, do not faint.
How blessed am I in this rich spoil, this picture,
For ever will I keep it here, here Mother,
For ever honour it: how oft, how chastely
Have I embraced the life of this, and kissed it?
The day draws on that thou must home return,
And make thy answer to the Duchess quest on
I know it troubles thee, for if thou fail in it—
O, I must dye.
Fear not, fear not, isle be nigh,
Cast thy trouble on my back, art nor cunning shall not lack
To preserve thee, still to keep, what thy envious foemen seek;
Go boldly home, and let thy mind, no distrustful crosses find:
All shall happen for the best; souls walk through sorrows that are blessed.
Then I go confident.
But first my Son, a thankful service must be done,
The good old woman for her pain, when every thing stands fair again,
Must ask a poor Boon, and that granting, there's nothing to thy journey wanting.
Except the trial of my soul to mischief,
And as I am a Knight, and love mine honour,
I grant it whatsoever.
Thy pure soul
Shall never sink for me, nor howl.
Then any thing.
When I shall ask remember.
If I forget, heavens goodness forget me.
On thy journey then a while, to the next cross way and stile
Isle conduct thee, keep thee true, to thy Mistress and thy vow,
And let all their envies fall, isle be with thee and quench all.
LAdy, the stubborn war's more mild then you are,
That allows Ransom, and the Prisoner taken—
We must not be too hasty: Remember Sir,
The wrong and violence you have offered us,
Burnt up our Frontier Towns, made prey before ye
Both of our Beasts, and Corn; slain our dear Subjects,
Opened the fountain eyes of thousand widows,
That daily fling their curses on your fury;
What ordinary satisfaction can salve this?
What hasty thought-on Ransom give a remedy?
You must excuse us yet, we will take more counsel:
In the mean time, not as a Prisoner,
But as a noble Prince we entertain ye.
I am at your mercy Lady, it is my fortune,
My stubborn fate; the day is yours, you have me,
The valour of one single man has crossed me,
Crossed me and all my hope; for when the Battles
Were at the hottest game of all their furies,
And conquest ready then to crown me Victor,
One single man broke in, one sword, one virtue,
And by his great example thousands followed,
O how I shame to think on it, how it shakes me!
Nor could our strongest head then stop his fury,
But like a tempest bore the field before him,
Till he arrived at me, with me he buckell'd,
A while I held him play; at length his violence
Beat me from my Saddle, then on foot pursued me,
There triumphed once again, then took me Prisoner:
When I was gone a fear possessed my people.
One single arm, in a just dause, heaven prospers.
Is not this stranger Knight as yet discovered,
That we may give his virtue a doe honour?
Not yet that we hear Madam, but to that purpose,
Two days ago we published Proclamations
O dainty Duchess, here I bring that Knight
Before thy fragrant face, that warlike wight,
He that Syenna's Duke, and all his Louts
Beat (as the Proverb seemly says) to clouts:
He that unhorsed the man of fame to boot,
And bootless taught his Grace to walk afoot:
He that your writings (packed to every pillar)
Promised promotion to, and store of filler,
That very man I set before thy Grace,
And once again pronounce this man it was.
A pretty foolish Squire, what must the Knight be?
Some Juggler, or some Mad-man.
I was not so,
When thy faint Troops in flocks I beat before me,
When through the thickest of thy warlike horse
I shot my self, even to thy Standard Duke,
And there found thee, there fingled thee, there showed thee
The temper of my Sword. It is true, thou stood'st me,
And like a noble Soldier bid me welcome;
And this isle say, More honour in that arm
I found and tried, then all thy Army carried:
What follows thy Imprisonment can tell thee.
His fair relation carries truth and virtue,
And by those Arms I see (for such were his,
So old, so rusty) this may be he that forced me.
Do you know this Jewel, from your Cask I rent it,
Even as I closed, and forced ye from your saddle;
Do you now remember me?
This is the valour
Madam, for certain he, it must be he,
That day I wore this Jewel, you remember it.
Yes, very well; not long before I sent it.
That day I lost this Jewel, in fight I lost it,
I felt his strokes, and felt him take it from me,
I wore it in my Cask; take it again Sir,
You won it nobly, it is the prize of honour.
My Father, and my self are made for ever.
Kneel down brave Sir, thus my Knight first I raise ye,
Gird on a Sword; next General of my Army,
Give him a Staff; last, one in Counsel near me.
Now, make us happy with your sight: how? Silvio?
Have I on thee bestowed this love, this honour?
The Treasons thou hast wrought set off with favours?
Unarme him presently: O thou foul Traitor,
Traitor to me, mine honour, and my Country,
Thou kindler of these Wars.
Mistake not Madam.
Away with him to prison,
See him safe kept, the Law shall shortly Sir,
Find fitter titles for ye, then I gave ye.
This is the youth that kilt me, isle be quit with him,
What a blind rogue was I, I could never know him?
And't please your Grace, I claim the benefit
Of the Proclamation that proclaimed him Traitor,
I brought him in.
Thou shalt have thy reward for it.
Let him be hanged, or drowned then.
Away with him.
Madam, I crave your promise first; you are tied to it,
You have past your Princely word.
Prove it, and take it.
This is the day appointed,
Appointed by your Grace for my appearance,
To answer to the Question.
I remember it.
I claim it then,
If you perform it not,
The penalty you claim too.
I not repent it;
If I absolve the words?
Your life is free then,
You have drawn a speedy course above my wishes,
To my rising, be sure ye hit it right,
Or isle be sure you shall not scope the danger.
My rest is up now Madam.
Then play it cunningly.
Now, whore's the Hag? where now are all her promises,
She would be with me, strengthen me, inform me?
My death will now be double death, ridiculous:
She was wont still to be near, to feel my miseries,
And with her Art, I see her no where now;
What have I undertaken? now she fails me,
No comfort now I find, how my soul staggers?
Till this hour never fear, nor doubt possessed me,
She cannot come, she will not come, she has fooled me;
Sure, she is the Devil, has drawn me on to ruin,
And now to death bequeaths me in my danger.
He stands distracted, and his colour changes.
I have given him that will make his blood forsake him;
Shortly his life.
His hands and contemplation
Have motion still, the rest is earth already.
Come, will ye speak or pray? your time grows out Sir;
How every where he looks? he's at last cast.
His colour comes again fresh.
It is a flash, Sir,
Before the flame burns out; can ye yet answer?
Yes Madam, now I can.
I fear you'll fail in it.
And do not think my silence a presage,
Or Omen to my end, you shall not find it;
I am bred a Soldier, not an Orator,
Madam, peruse this scroll, let that speak for me,
And as you are Royal, wrong not the construction.
By Heaven you shall have fair play.
I shall look for it.
Tell me what it that only thing,
For which all women long;
Yet having what they most desire,
To have it do's them wrong.
Tic not to be chaste, nor fair,
Such gifts malice may impair;
Richly trimmed, to walk or ride,
Or to wanton unespi'd;
To preserve an honest name,
And so to give it up to fame;
These are toys. In good or ill
They desire, to have their will;
Yet when they have it, they abuse it,
For they know not how to use it.
You have answered right, and gained your life,
I give it.
O happy Hag! But my most gracious Madam,
Your promise tide a nobler favour to me.
It is true, my daughter too.
I hope you will keep it.
It is not in my power now, she is long since wandered,
Stolen from the Court, and me; and what I have not
I cannot give: no man can tell me of her,
Nor no search find her out: and if not Silvio,
Which strongly I believe—
Mock me not Lady,
For as I am a servant to her virtue,
Since my first hour of exile, I ne'er saw her
That she is gone it is too too true, and lamentable,
Our last hope was in you.
What do I hear then,
And wherefore have I life bestowed and honour?
To what end do I walk? for men to wonder at,
And fight, and fool? pray ye take your honours from me,
(My sorrows are not fit companions for 'em)
And when ye please my life: Art thou gone Mistress,
And wander heaven knows where? this vow I make thee,
That till I find thee out, and see those fair eyes,
Those eyes that shed their lights, and life into me,
Never to know a friend, to seek a kindred,
To rest where pleasure dwells, and painted glory,
But through the world, the wide world thus to wander,
The wretched world alone, no comfort with me,
But the mere meditations of thy goodness:
Honour and greatness, thus adieu.
Stay Silvio,
And Lady sit again, I come for Justice.
What would she now?
To claim thy promise Silvio,
The Boon thou swore to give me.
What may this be,
A woman, or a Devil?
It is a Witch sure,
And by her means he came to untwist this Riddle,
That I am bound to her for my liffe, mine honour,
And many other thousand ways for comfort
I here confess: Confess a promise too,
That what she would ask me to requite these favours,
Within the endeavour of my life to grant,
I would; and here I stand my words full master.
I wish no more: great Lady, witness with me,
The Boon I crave for all my service to thee,
Is now to be thy wife, to grant me marriage.
How? for to marry thee? ask again woman,
Thou wilful woman, ask again.
No more Sir.
Ask land, and life.
I ask thee for a Husband.
Marry her, and beat her into Gun-powder,
She would make rare Crackers.
Ask a better fortune,
Thou art too old to marry: I a Soldier,
And always married to my sword.
Thy word Fool,
Break that, and isle break all thy fortunes yet.
He shall not,
I am witness to his faith: and isle compel it.
It is fit ye hold your word, Sir.
O most wretched.
This was a fortune now beyond my wishes,
For now my Daughter's free, if ever I find her.
But not from me.
You are sharer in this happiness,
My self will wait upon this marriage,
And do the old woman all the honour possible.
Isle lead the Knight, and what there wants in dalliance,
We'll take it out in drink.
O wretched Silvio. 
Hast thou sent for him?
Yes,
A young man, say thou?
Yes, very young, and very amorous.
And handsome?
As the Town affords.
And dare thou
Be so far good, and Mistress of thine honour,
To slight these?
For my husbands sake to curse 'em,
And since you have made me Mistress of my fortune,
Never to point at any joy, but husband,
I could have cozened ye, but so much I love ye,
And now so much I weigh the estimation
Of an unspotted wife—
I dare believe thee,
And never more shall doubt torment my spirit.
How now Penurio?
The thing is coming, Mistress.
Isle take my standing.
Do, and isle take mine. 
Where did thou leave him?
I left him in a Cellar,
Where he has paid me titely, paid me home Mistress,
We had an hundred &amp; fifty healths to you, sweet Mistress,
And three score and ten damnations to my Master;
Mistress, shall I speak a foolish word to ye?
What's that Penurio?
The fellow's drunk.
I would fine know your body.
How's that? how's that prithee?
I would know it carnally,
I would conglutinate.
The reason sirrah?
Lobster, sweet Mistress, Lobster.
Thy Master hears.
Lobster, sweet Master, Lobster.
Thou art the most precious rogue.
Most precious Lobster.
Do you see who's here? go sleep ye drunken rascal.
Remember you refuse me armed in Lobster. 
O my lost Rugio, welcome, welcome, welcome,
A thousand welcomes here Isle seal.
Pray ye stay, Lady,
Do you love me ever at this rate? or is the fit now,
By reason of some wrong done by your husband,
More fervent on ye?
Can I choose but love thee?
Thou art my Martyr, thou hast suffered for me,
My sweet, sweet Rugio.
Do you do this seriously?
It is true, I would be entertained thus.
These are nothing,
No kisses, no embraces, no endeerements,
To those—
Do what you will.
Those that shall follow,
Those I will crown our love withal; why sigh ye?
Why look ye sad my dear one?
Nay faith nothing,
But me thinks so sweet a beauty, as yours shows to me,
And such an innocence as you may make it,
Should hold a longer Siege.
Ha, you speak truth, Sir.
I would not have it so.
And now methinkes,
Now I consider truly what becomes me,
I have been cozened, fearfully abused,
My reason blinded.
Nay, I did but jest with ye.
Isle take ye at your word, and thank ye for it Sir;
And now I see no sweetness in that person,
Nothing to stir me to abuse a Husband,
To ruin my fair fame.
Good Isabella.
No handsome man, no any thing to dote on,
No face, no tongue to catch me, poor at all points,
And I an ass.
Why do ye wrong me Lady?
If I were thus, and had no youth upon me,
My service of so mean a way to win ye,
(Which you your self are conscious must deserve ye,
If you had thrice the beauty you possess, must reached ye)
If in my tongue your fame lay wrack't, and ruined
With every cup I drink: if in opinion
I were a lost, defamed man: but this is common
Where we love most, where most we stake our fortunes,
There least and basest we are rewarded: fare ye well,
Know now I hate you too as much, contemn ye,
And weigh my credit at as high a value.
May be I did but jest.
Ye are a woman,
And now I see your wants, and mine own follies,
And task my self with indiscretion,
For doting on a face so poor.
Say ye so Sir,
(I must not lose my end) I did but jest with you,
Only fooled thus to try your faith: my Rugio,
Do you think I could forget?
Nay, it is no matter.
Is it possible I should forsake a constancy,
So strong, so good, so sweet?
A subtle woman.
You shall forgive me, it was a trick to try ye,
And were I sure ye loved me—
Do you doubt now?
I do not doubt, but he that would profess this,
And bear that full affection you make show of,
Should do—
What should I do?
I cannot show ye.
Isle try thee damnedst Devil: hark ye Lady,
No man shall dare do more, no service top me,
Isle marry ye.
How Sir?
Your husbands sentenced,
And he shall dye.
Dye?
Dye for ever to ye,
The danger is mine own.
Dye did ye tell me?
He shall dye, I have cast the way.
O foul man,
Malicious bloody man.
When shall he dye Sir,
By whom, and how?
Hast thou betrayed me, woman?
Base man, thou would have ruined me, my name too,
And like a Toad, poisoned my virtuous memory:
Further then all this, dost thou see this friend here,
This only friend, shame take thy lust and thee,
And shake thy soul, his life, the life I love thus,
My life in him, my only life thou aim'dst at.
Am I catch's thus?
The Law shall catch ye better.
You make a trade of betraying women's honours,
And think it noble in ye to be lustful,
Report of me hereafter—
Fooled thus finely?
I must entreat ye walk, Sir, to the Justice,
Where if he will bid ye kill me—
Pray stay a while, Sir,
I must use a Players shift, do you know me now Lady?
Your brother Claudio sure.
O me, it is he Sir,
O my best brother.
My best sister now too,
I have tried ye, found ye so, and now I love ye,
Love ye so truly nobly.
Sir, I thank ye,
You have made me a most happy man.
Thank her Sir,
And from this hour preserve that happiness,
Be no more fooled with jealousy.
I have lost it,
And take me now new borne again, new natured.
I do, and to that promise tie this faith,
Never to have a false thought tempt my virtue.
Enough, enough, I must desire your presence,
My Cozen Rhodope has sent in all hast for us,
I am sure you will be welcome.
Isle wait on ye.
What the Project is—
We shall know when we are there, Sir. 
Joy to you Silvio, and your young fair Bride,
You have stolen a day upon us; you cannot woo Sir.
The joys of Hell hang over me, O mischief,
To what a fortune has the Devil driven me?
Am I reserved for this?
Beshrew me Sir,
But you have gotten you a right fair bedfellow,
Let you alone to choose.
I beseech your Grace,
It is misery enough to have met the Devil,
Not men's reproaches too.
How old is she?
A very Girl, her eye delivers it.
Her teeth are scarce come yet.
What goodly children
Will they two have now? she is rarely made to bread on,
What a sweet timberd body?
Knotty in the back,
But will hold out the stronger; What a nose?
I marry, such a nose, so rarely mounted,
Upon my conscience, it was the part he doted on.
And that fine little eye to it, like an Elephants.
Yes, if her feet were round, and her ears sachells.
For any thing we know.
Have ye no mercy?
No pity in your bloods, to use a wretch thus?
You Princes, in whose hearts the best compassions,
Nearest to those in Heaven, should find fit places,
Why do you mock at misery? Fling scorns and baseness
Upon his broken back, that sinks with sorrows?
Heaven may reward you too, and an hour come,
When all your great designs shall show ridiculous,
And your hearts pinched like mine.
Fie Sir, so angry
Upon your wedding day? go smug your self,
The Maid will come anon: what Musick's this?
I warrant you some noble preparation.
Let's take our places then.
More of these Devils dumps?
Must I be ever haunted with these witchcrafts?
Room, room for merry spirits, room,
Hither on command we come,
From the good old Beldam sent,
Cares and sorrows to prevent.
Look up Silvio, smile, and sing,
After winter comes a spring.
Fear not faint fool what may follow,
Eyes that now are sunk and hollow,
By her Art may quick return
To their flames again, and burn.
Art commands all youth, and blood,
Strength and beauty it makes good.
Fear not then, despair not, sing
Round about as we do spring:
Cares and sorrows cast away,
This is the old wives holy-day.
Who is this?
The shape of Belvidere.
Now Silvio,
How dost thou like me now?
Thus I kneel to thee.
Stand up, and come no nearer, mark me well too,
For if thou trouble me I vanish instantly:
Now choose wisely or choose never,
One thou must enjoy for ever.
Dost thou love me thus?
Most dearly.
Take heed fool, it concerns thee nearly.
If thou wilt have me young and bright,
Pleasing to thine eye and sight,
Courtly, and admired of all,
Take heed least thy fame do fall,
I shall then be full of scorn,
Wanton, proud, beware the horn,
Hating what I loved before,
Flattery apt to fall before,
All consuming, nothing getting,
Thus thy fair name comes to setting.
But if old and free from these
Thou shalt choose me, I shall please:
I shall then maintain thee still,
With my virtue and my skill:
Still increase and build thy name,
Choose now Silvio, here I am.
I know not what to say, which way to turn me,
Into thy Sovereign will I put my answer.
I thank ye Sir, and my will thus rewards ye,
Take your old Love, your best, your dearest Silvio:
No more Spells now, nor further shapes to alter me,
I am thy Belvidere indeed, Dear Mother,
There is no altering this; heavens hand is with it:
And now you ought to give me, he has fairly won me.
But why that Hag?
In that shape most secure still,
I followed all your fortunes, served, and counselled ye,
I met ye at the Farmers first a Country wench,
Where fearing to be known I took that habit,
And to make ye laughing sport at this mad marriage,
By secret aid of my friend Rhodope
We got this Mask.
And I am sure I have ye.
For ever now, for ever.
You see it must be,
The wheel of destiny hath turned it round so.
It must, it is, and cursed be he that breaks it.
Isle put a choice to you Sir: ye are my Prisoner.
I am so, and I must be so, till it please you—
Choose one of these, either to pay a Ransom,
At what rate I shall set it, which shall be high enough,
And so return a Free-man, and a Bachelor,
Or give me leave to give you a fit wife,
In honour every way your Graces equal,
And so your Ransom's paid.
You say most nobly,
Silvio's example's mine, pray choose you for me.
I thank ye Sir, I have got the mastry too,
And here I give your Grace a husbands freedom,
Give me your hand, my Husband.
You much honour me,
And I shall ever serve ye for this favour.
Come Lopes, let us give our wives the breeches too,
For they will have 'em.
Whilst they rule with virtue
Isle give 'em, skin and all.
We'll scratch it off else.
I am glad ye live, more glad ye live to honour,
And from this hour a stronger love dwell with us;
Pray you take your man again.
He knows my house Sir.
It is sin to keep you longer from your Loves,
We'll lead the way; and you young men that know not
How to preserve a wife, and keep her fair,
Give 'em their sovereign wills, &amp; pleased they are. 

