SIgnor Alphonso, ye are too rugged to her,
Believe too full of harsnesse.
Yes, it seems so.
A father of so sweet a child, so happy,
(Fie Sir) so excellent in all endowments,
In blessedness of beauty, such a mirror.
She is a fool, away.
Can ye be angry?
Can any wind blow rough, upon a blossom
So fair, and tender? Can a Fathers nature,
A noble Fathers too?
All this is but prating:
Let her be ruled; let her observe my humour,
With tny eyes let her see; with my ears listen;
I am her Father: I begot her, bred her,
And I will make her.
No doubt ye may compel her,
But what a misceivous, unhappy fortune
May wait upon this will of yours, as commonly
Such forcings ever end in hates, and ruins.
Is it not a man I wish her to? a strong man?
What can she have? what could she have? a Gentleman?
A young man? and an able-man? a rich man?
A handsome man? a valiant man? do you mark me?
None of your peeced-companions, your pin'd-Gallants,
That fly to fitters, with every flaw of weather:
None of your impt bravados: what can she ask more?
Is not a mettal'd-man fit for a woman?
A strong chindman? i'll not be foold, nor flurted.
I grant ye Rodorgio is all these
And a brave Gentleman: must it therefore follow
Upon necessity she must dote upon him?
Will ye allow no liberty in choosing?
Alas she is tender yet.
Enough enough, enough Sir:
She is malleable; she'll endure the hammer,
And why not that strong workman that strikes deepest?
Let me know that? she is fifteen, with the vantage,
And if she be not ready now for manage—
You know he is a banished man: an out-Law;
And how he lives: his nature rough, and bloody
By customary ripens: now, her sweet humour
That is as easy as a calm, and peaceful,
All her affections, like the dews on Roses,
Fair as the flowers themselves: as sweet, and gentle:
How would you have these meet?
A bed, a bed sir:
Let her be the fairest Rose, and the sweetest,
Yet I know this fair rose must have her prickles:
I grant ye Rodorigo is an out-Law,
An easy composition calls him in again,
He is a valiant man, and he is a rich man,
And loves the fool: a little rough by custom:
She'll like him ten times better. She'll dote upon him,
If ere they come to grappling, run mad for him;
But there is an other in the wind, some castrell
That hovers over her, and dares her daily,
Some flickring slave.
I dare not think so poorly.
Something there is, and must be: but I shall sent it
And hunt it narrowly.
I never saw her yet
Make offer at the least glance of affection,
But still so modest, wise.
They are wise to gull us,
There was a fellow, old Ferandos son,
I must confess handsome, but my enemy,
And the whole family, I hate young Pedro:
That fellow I have seen her gaze upon,
And turn, and gaze again, and make such offers
As if she would shoot her eyes like meteors at him:
But that cause stands removed.
You need not doubt him.
For long since as it was thought on a grieved conscience,
He left his father, and his friends: more pity:
For truth reports he was a noble Gentleman.
Let him be what he will: he was a beggar,
And there i'll leave him.
The more the Court must answer;
But certainly I think, though she might favour him,
And love his goodness, as he was an honest man:
She never with loose eyes stuck on his person.
She is so full of conscience too, and charity,
And outward holiness, she will undo me:
Relieves more beggars, then an hospital; 
And all poor rogues, that can but say their prayers,
And tune their pipes to Lamentations,
She thinks she is bound to dance to: good morrow to you,
And that's as ye deserve too: you know my mind,
And study to observe it: doe it cheerfully.
And readily, and home.
I shall obey ye.
But noble sir.
Come, come, away with your flatteries,
And your fine phrases,
Pray ye be gentle to her:
I know 'em; and know your feats: if you will find me
Noble and loving, seek me in your duty,
You know I am too indulgent.
Alas poor Lady.
To your devotions: I take no good thing from you
Come Gentlemen; leave pitying, and moaning of her,
And praising of her virtues: and her whym-whams,
It makes her proud, and sturdy:
Good hours wait on ye. 
I thank ye Gentlemen: I want such comforts:
I would thank you too father: but your cruelty
Hath almost made me senseless of my duty,
Yet still I must know: would J had known nothing;
What Poor attend my charity to day, wench?
Of all sort, Madam; your open handed bounty
Makes 'em flock every hour: some worth your pity,
But others that have made a trade of begging.
Wench, if they ask it truly, I must give it:
It takes away the holy use of charity
To examine wants.
I would you would be merry:
A cheerfull-giving hand, as I think, Madam,
Requires a heart as cheerful.
Alas Iuletta,
What is there to be merry at? what joy now,
Unless we fool our own afflictions,
And make them show ridiculous?
Sure Madam,
You could not seem thus serious, if you were married,
Thus sad, and full of thoughts.
Married? to whom, wench?
Thou think if there be a young handsome fellow
As those are plentiful, our cares are quenched then.
Madam, I think a lusty handsome fellow
If he be kind, and loving, and a right one,
Is even as good a pill, to purge this melancholy,
As ever Galen gave, I am sure more natural:
And merrier for the heart, then Wine and Saffron:
Madam, wanton youth is such a Cataplasme.
Who has bin thy tutor wench?
Even my own thoughts, Lady:
For though J be bard the liberty of talking,
Yet I can think unhappily, and as near the mark, Madam,
Faith, marry, and be merry.
Who will have me?
Who will be troubled with a tettish Girl?
It may be proud, and to that vice expencefull?
Who can assure himself, I shall live honest?
Let every man take his fortune:
And of my conscience
If once I grow to breeding, a whole Kingdom
Will not contain my stock.
The more the merrier:
It is brave to be a mother of new Nations.
Why, I should bury a hundred husbands.
Tic no matter:
As long as ye leave sufficient men to stock ye.
Is this thy mirth? are these the joys of marriage?
Away light-headed fool; are these contentments?
If I could find a man.
You may a thousand.
Mere men I know I may: and there a woman
Has liberty, (at least she'll venture for it,)
To be a monster and become the time too;
But to enjoy a man, from whose example
(As from a compass) we may steer our fortunes,
Our actions, and our age; and safe arrive at
A memory that shall become our ashes,
Such things are few, and far to seek; to find one
That can but rightly manage the wild beast, woman,
And sweetly govern with her. But no more of this, wench,
Tic not for thy discourse: Lets in, and see
What poor afflicted wait our charity. 
Stand off, and keep your Ranks: twenty foot further:
There Iouse your selves with reason, &amp; discretion.
The Sun shines warm: the farther still the better,
Your beasts will bolt anon, and then tic dangerous.
Heaven bless our Mistress.
Does the crack go that way?
'Twil be of the o'ther side anon.
Pray ye friend.
Your friend? and why your friend? why, goodman turncoat
What dost thou see within me, or without me,
Or what itch dost thou know upon me, tell me,
That I should be thy friend? what do I look like
Any of thy acquaintance hoong in Gibbets?
Hast thou any Friends, Kindred, or Alliance,
Or any higher ambition, then an almes-basket?
I would be your worships friend.
So ye shall Sir,
When I quarter the same louse with ye.
Tic twelve o'clock.
Tic ever so with thee, when thou hast done scratching,
For that provokes thy stomach to ring noon;
O the infinite Seas of porridge thou hast swallowd!
And yet thou look as if they had bin but Glisters;
Thou feedst abundance; thou had need of sustenance;
Alms do you call it to relieve these Rascals? 
No•hinge but a general rot of sheep can satisfie'em.
Did not I tel you, how she would undo me?
What Marts of Rogues, and Beggars?
Tic charity
Methinks, you are bound to love her for—
Yes, I warrant ye,
If men could sale to heaven in porridge pots,
With masts of Beef, and Mutton, what a voyage should I make?
What are all these?
Poor people, and 't like your worship.
Wretched poor people.
Very hungry people.
And very Lousy.
Yes forsooth, so, so.
I'll undertake five hundred head about 'em,
And that's no needy Grassier.
What are you?
Strangers that come to wonder at your charity,
Yet people poor enough to beg a blessing.
Use them with favour, sir, their shows are reverent,
It seems ye are holy Pilgrims?
Ye guess right sir,
And bound far off, to offer our devotions.
What make ye this way? we keep no Relics here,
Nor holy Shrines.
The holiest we ere heard of;
Ye keep a living monument of goodness,
A Daughter of that pious excellence,
The very Shrines of Saints sink at her virtues,
And swear they cannot hold pace with her pieties,
We come to see this Lady: not with profane eyes,
Nor wanton bloods, to do at upon her beauties,
But through our tedious ways to beg her blessings.
This is a new way of begging, and a neat one,
And this cries money for reward: good store too;
These commendations beg not with bag, and bottle;
Well, well, the sainting of this woman (Gentlemen)
I know what it must come too: these women saints
Are plaguy heavy saints: they out-waigh a he-saint
Three thousand thick; I know: I feel.
Ye are more afraid then hurt sir.
Have you your commendations ready too?
He bows, and nods.
A handsome well built person.
What Country-craver are you? nothing but motion?
A puppet-Pilgrim?
Hoe's a stranger sir;
This four days I have travelled in his company,
But little of his business, or his Language
As yet, I have understood.
Both young, and handsome,
Only the Sun has bin too saucy with him.
Would ye have money sir, or meat? what kind of blessing
Does your devotion look for? Still more ducking?
Be there any saints, that understand by signs only?
More motion yet? this is the prettiest Pilgrim,
The pink of pilgrims: isle be for ye sir;
Do ye discourse with signs? ye are heartily welcome:
A poor viaticum; very good gold sir;
But holy men affect a better treasure.
I kept it for your goodness, but neerthelesse
Since it can prove but burden some to your holiness,
And you affect light prayer, fit for carriage,
I'll put this up again.
Ye are too unreverent..
Ye talk too broad; must I give way, and wealth too
To every toy, that carries a grave seeming?
Must my good angels wait on him? if the proud hilding
Would yield but to my will, and know her duty
I knew what I would suffer.
Good sir, be patient,
The wrongs ye do these men, may light on you,
Too heavy too: and then you will wish you had said less;
A comely and sweet usage becomes strangers.
We shall have half the Kingdom strangers shortly,
And this fond prodigality be suffered;
But I must be an ass, see 'hem relieved, sirah;
If I were young again, I would sooner get bear whelps,
And safer too, them any of these She-saints,
But I will break her,
Such a face for certain.
Me thinks I have seen it too: but we are consent;
But fair befall thee Pilgrim, thou look lovely. 
Will ye troop up, ye porridge Regiment? 
Captain Poors quarter will ye move?
Ye dull Knave,
Are not these wretches served yet?
'Blesse my Mistress.
Do you make sport sir, with their miseries?
Ye drowsy rogue.
They are too high fed, Madam,
Their stomachs are a'sleep yet.
Serve 'hem plentifully,
Or i'll serve you out next: even out of doors, sirah;
And serve 'em quickly too.
Heaven bless the Lady.
Bless the good end I mean it for.
I would I knew it:
If it be for any mans sake, i'll cry amen too,
Well Madam, ye have even as pretty a port of pensioners.
Vain-glory would seek more, and handsomer. 
But I appeal to virtue what my end is; 
What men are these?
It seems they are holy Pilgrims:
That handsome youth should suffer such a penance,
Would I were even the saint they make their vows too,
How easily I would grant.
Heavens grace in-wheele ye:
And all good thoughts, and prayers dwell about ye,
Abundance be your friend; and holy charity
Be ever at your hand' to crown ye glorious.
I thank ye sir; peace guide your travels too,
And what you wish for most, end all your trobles;
Remember me by this: and in your prayers
When your strong heart melts, mediate my poor fortunes.
All my devotions wait upon your service.
Are ye of this Country, sir?
Yes, worthiest Lady,
But far off bred: my fortunes farther from me.
Gentle, I dare believe.
I have lived freer.
I am no inquisitor, that were too curious:
What ever vow, or penance pulls ye on sir;
Conscience, or love, or stubborn disobedience,
The saint ye kneel too, hear, and ease your travels.
Yours near begin: and thus I seal my prayers. 
How constantly this man looks? how he sighs?
Some great affliction hatches his devotions,
Right holy sir: how young, and sweet he suffers?
Would I might suffer with him.
He turns from us:
Alas he weeps too: something presses him
He would reveal, but dare not; sir, be comforted,
Ye come for that: and take it: if it be want, sir,
To me ye appear so worthy of relieving,
I am your steward: speak, and take: he's dumb still:
Now as I have a faith this man so stirs me,
His modesty makes me afraid I have trespassed.
Would he would stir me too: I like his shape well.
May be he would speak alone: go off Iuletta,
Afflicted hearts fear their own motions,
Be not far off.
Would I were nearer to him,
A young smug handsome holiness has no fellow. 
Why do you grieve? do you find your penance sharp?
Orare the vows ye have made, too mighty for ye?
Do's not the world allure ye to look back
And sorrow for the sweet time ye have lost?
Ye are young, and fair; be not deluded, sir;
A manly made up heart contemns these shadows,
And yours appears no less: griefs for your fears,
For hours ill-spent, for wrongs don rash, and rudely,
For foul contempts for faiths ill violated,
Become fears well: I dare not task your Goodness:
And then a sorrow shows in his true glory
When the whole heart is excellently sorry.
I pray ye be comforted.
I am, deer Lady,
And such a comfort ye have cast upon me,
That though I struggle with mine own calamities
Too mighty, and too many for my manage,
And though, like angry waves, they curled upon me
Contending proudly who should first devour me,
Yet I would stem their danger.
He speaks nobly:
What do ye want?
All that can make me happy:
I want my self.
Your self? who robed ye Pilgrim?
Why does he look so constantly upon me?
I want my self: indeed, you holy wounderers
Are said to seek much: but to seek your selves.
I seek my self; and am but my selfs-shadow:
Have lost my self; and now am not so noble.
I seek my self: something I yet remember
That bears that Motto; it is not he: he is younger,
And far more tender: for that self-sake (Pilgrim)
Be who it will, take this.
Your hand I dare take,
That be far from me, Lady, thus I kiss it,
And thus I bless it too; be constant fair still:
Be good, and live to be a great example. 
One word more (Pilgrim) has amazed me strangely,
Be constant fair still: tic the posse here:
And here without, Be good: he wept to see me 
Juletta:
Madam.
Take this Key, and fetch me
The Marigold Jewel that lies in my little Cabinet:
I think tic that: what eyes had I, to miss him?
Of me, what thoughts? he had no beard then, and
As I remember well, he was more ruddy. 
If this be he, he has a manly face yet
A goodly shape.
Here Madam?
Let me see it:
Tic so, too true: It must be he, or nothing,
He spak the words just as they stand engraved here:
I seek my self, and am but my selfes-shadow:
Alas poor man: did thou not meet him, Iuletta?
The Pilgrim wench?
He went by long ago, Madam.
I forgot to give him something.
It was ill done Lady:
For, of my troth, he is the handsomest man
I saw this many a day: would he had all my wealth,
And me to boot: what ails she to grow sullen?
Come, I forgot; but I will recompense it. 
Can she slip through a cat-hole? tel me that: resolve me;
Can the sly ith ayre? is she a thing invisible?
Gon, and none know it?
Ye amaze your servants.
Some pelting rogue has watched her hour of itching,
And clawd her; clawd her: do you mark me, clawd her;
Some that I foster up.
They are all here, sir.
Let 'em be where they will, they are arrant rascals,
And by this hand i'll hang 'em all.
Deal calmly:
You will not give 'em time to answer ye.
I'll choke 'hem: famish 'em: what say you wag-taile?
You knew her mind: you were of council with her,
Tell me: and tell me true.
Ask with discretion.
Discretion? hang discretion, hang ye all:
Let me know where she is.
Would you know of me sir?
Of thee sir: I, of thee sir: what art thou sir?
His woman sir, and 't like your worship, sir.
Her band, her fidle-stick.
Her Lady-fayry, to oil the doors of nights,
That they may open with discretion,
Her Gin, her Nut-crack,
Tic very well sir.
Thou least; tic dan nal le ill, tic most abhominaable:
Will ye confess (Thing)
Say I were gulty, sir?
I would be hanged before I would confess:
Is this a World to confess in?
Deal directly.
Yes, if my matter lie direct before me:
But when I am forced, and ferryted.
Tell me the truth,
And as I live, i'll give thee a new petticoat.
And you would give me ten, I would not tell ye,
Truths bear a greater price, then you are aware of.
Deal modestly.
I doe not pluck my cloths up.
What say you sirha? you? or you? are ye dumb all?
I saw her last night, and 't shall like your worship
When I served in her Livery.
What's that, sirha?
Her Chamber pot, and 't please ye.
A new Livery.
Where lay she? who lay with her?
In truth not I sir:
I lay with my fellow Fredrick, in the flea-chamber
And 't like your worship, we are almost worried.
I left her by her self, in her own closet,
And there I thought she had slept.
Why lay you from her?
It was her will I should: she is my Mistress,
And my part is obedience.
Were all the doors locked?
All mine.
And mine: she could not get out those ways
Unless she leapt the walls: and those are higher
Then any women's courage dare aspire at.
Come, you must know.
Conceal it not, but deal plain.
If I did know, and her trust lay upon me,
Not all your angers, nor your flatteries
Should make me speak, but having no more interest
Then I may well deliver to the air,
I'll tell ye what I know: and tell it liberally,
I think she is gon, because we cannot find her;
I think she is weary of your tyranny,
And therefore gon: may be she is in love:
May be in love, where you show no great liking,
And therefore gon: May be, some point of conscience,
Or vowed devotion.
These are nothing, minion;
You that can aim at these, must know the truth too.
Any more truth then this if I know, hang me,
Or where to search for it, if I make a lie
To gain your love, and envy my best Mistress,
Pin me against a wall, with my heel's upwards.
Out of my doors.
That's all my poor petition:
For if your house were gold, and she not in it,
Sir, I should count it but a cage to whistle in.
Whore, if she be above ground, I will have her.
I would live in a cole-pit, then, were I your daughter.
Certain she dos not know Sir.
Hang her, hang her:
She knows too much: search all the house; all corners,
And where tic possible she may go out, 
If I do find your tricks.
Reward me for 'hem.
Or if I had such tricks, you could discover
So weak, and slightly woven, you might look through,
All the young Girls should hoot me out of the Parish.
You are my Master, but ye own an anger
Becomes a School-boy, that hath lost his Apples;
Will ye force things into our knowledges?
Come hither Juletta; thou did love me.
And do still:
You are my Ladies father, and I reverence ye.
Thou would have pleased my humour.
Any good way,
That carried not suspicion in it: or flattery,
Or fail of trust.
Come, come, thou would have.—
Stay sir.
And thou hast felt my bounty for it, and shalt doe.
Dost thou want Clothes or Money?
Both.
Shalt have both.
But not this way: I had rather be an Adamite
And bring Fig-leaves into fashion again.
If you were young sir,
Handsome, and fitted to a women's appetite;
And I a giddy-headed girl, that cared for nothing,
Much might be done; then you might fumble with me,
And think to grope out matters of some moment,
Which now you will put too short for:
For what you have seen hitherto,
And know by me, has been but honest service,
Which I dare pin in the market-place to answer;
And let the world, the flesh and devil examine it,
And come you in too, I dare stand your strictest.
And so much good may doe you, with your dreams of courtesy.
This is most monstrous.
Sure she do's not know sir:
She durst not be so confident and guilty.
How now; what news? what hopes and steps dis∣covered?
Speak any thing thats good, that tends to the matter;
Doe you stand staring still?
We are no Gods sir,
To say she is here, or there: and what she is doing;
But we have searched.
I am sure she is not in the Cellar;
For look you sir, if she had been in the Cellar—
I am sure thou hast been there.
As I carried the matter,
For I searched every piece of Wine; yes sure sir,
And every little Teresse that could but testify:
And I drew hard to bolt her out.
Away with him;
Fling him in the Haymow, let him lie a mellowing;
He stinks of Muskadel like an English Christmas:
Are these your cares? your services?
Pray ye hear sir,
We have found where she went out; her very footing.
Where where? go on.
Observe then with more slaiednesse.
Searching the garden: at the little Postern
That opens to the Park, we first discovered it.
A little foot?
It must be hers, or none sir.
How far beyond that?
To the Park it leads us,
But there the ground being hard, we could not mark it.
She always kept that Key: I was a coxcomb,
A fool, an ass, to give a girl that liberty:
Saddle my Horses, rogues, ye drunken varlets:
Your precious diligence lies in Pint-pots,
Your brains in Butts, my horses, ye pin-buttocks.
You'll bear me company?
We dare not leave ye,
Unless we found a quieter soul within ye.
If we may do the Lady any service,
Sweet, gentle soul.
I say again, my horses:
Are ye so hot? have ye your private pilgrimages?
Must ye be Jumping-Jone? Isle wander with ye:
Isle jump ye, and Isle joggle ye: my horses;
And keep me this young Lirry-poope within doors,
I will discover, dame.
It is fit you should sir,
If ye knew what: Well Love, if thou be with her,
Or what power else that arms her resolution,
Conduct her fair, and keep her from this mad man,
Direct her to her wishes: dwell about her
That no dishonourable end ore-take her,
Danger, or want: and let me try my fortune.
You know the place we meet in?
We shall hit it.
And as ye are honest Gentlemen, endeavour.
We will search the best we can: if she light in our hands.
Tie her to the horse tail.
We know how to use her,
But not your way, for all your state.
Make haste there:
And get you in, and look to th'house. If you stir out, Damsel,
Or set of foot any new motion this way,
When I come home, (which shall be suddenly)
You know my mind: if you doe play the rascal,
I have my eyes and ears in sundry places,
If ye doe prance.
I shall doe that, that's fit, sir:
And fit to cross your fooleries; Isle fail else.
And so Isle to my chamber. 
To your prayers,
And leave your stubborn tricks: She is not far yet,
She cannot be; and we dividing suddenly.
Keep her from thy hands, I beseech.
Our horses;
Come cheerfully. Isle teach her to run gadding. 
Captain, you're not merry.
We get nothing,
We have no sport; whoring, apd drinking spoils us,
We keep no guards.
There come no passengers,
Merchants, nor Gentlemen, nor whosoever,
But we have Tribute.
And whilst we spend that idly,
We let those pass that carry the best purchase.
Isle have all searched &amp; brought in; Rogues, and Beggars,
Have got the trick now to become Banck-masters.
Isle have none scope: only my friends, and neighbours,
That may deliver to the King my innocence;
Those I would have regarded; tic policy.
But otherwise nor gravities, nor shadows,
Appear they how they will, that may have purses,
For they shall pay.
Ye speak now like a Captain.
And if we spare, flea us, and coin our Cassoks;
Will ye look blithe?
You hear no preparation
The King intends against us yet?
Not a word sir.
Good man, he's troubled with matter of more moment,
Hummings of higher nature vex his brains, sir;
Doe not we fee his garrisons?
Who are out now?
Good fellows sir, that if there be any purchase stirring
Will strike it dead; Jaques and Loper, Lads
That know their quarters, as they know their knapsaks;
And will not off.
Where is the boy ye brought me?
A pretty lad, and of a quick capacity,
And bred up neatly.
He's within at meat, sir,
The knave is hungry: yet he seasons all
He eats or drinks with many tears and sighings,
The saddest appetite I ever looked on;
The boy is young, tic fear and want of company
He knows and loves: use him not rough, nor harshly,
He will be quickly bold; Isle entertain him:
I want a pretty Boy to waite upon me,
And when I am sad or sleepy, to prate to me;
Besides there's something in his face, I like well.
And still the more I look, more like; let him want nothing,
And use him gently, all.
Here's a small Box, sir,
We took about him, which he grieved to part with,
May be some wealth.
Alas, some little money
The poor knave carried to defray his lodgings,
Isle give it him again, and add unto it.
It were sin to open such a petty purchase.
How now, who is this? what have you brought me Soldiers?
We know not well what: a strange staving fellow,
Sullen enough I am sure.
Where took ye him?
Upon the skirt of the wood, viewing, and gaping,
And sometime standing still, as if he had meant
To view the best accesses to our quarters;
Money he has enough: and when we threatened him,
He smiled, and yielded; but not one word uttered.
His habit says he's holy: if his heart
Keep that proportion too, it is best ye free him,
We keep his Wallet here: I am sure tic heavy.
Pilgrim: come hither sir; Are you a Pilgrim?
A piece of pretty holiness: doe you shrink sir?
A smug young Saint. What Country were you born in?
Ye have a Spanish face: In a dumb Province?
And had your mother too this excellent virtue?
No tongue do you say? sure she was a matchless woman;
What a sine family is this man sprung from!
Certain he was begotten in a calm,
When all was hushed: the Midwife was dumb Midnight;
Are ye sealed up? or doe you scorn to answer?
Ye are in my hands, and I have medicines for ye
Can make ye speak: pull off his Bonnet, Soldiers;
Ye have a speaking face.
I am sure a handsome:
This Pilgrim cannot want She-Saints to pray to.
Stand nearer: ha?
Come, do your worst; I am ready.
Is your tongue found? go off, and let me talk with him;
An keep your watches round.
We are ready Captain.
So: now what are ye?
Am I?
My habit shows me what I am.
Thy heart
A desperate fool, and so thy fate shall tell thee;
What devil brought thee hither? for I know thee.
I know thou dost: and since it is my fortune
To light into thy fingers; I must think too
The most malicious of all devils brought me,
Yet some men say thou art Noble.
Not to thee,
That were a benefit to mock the giver:
Thy father hates my friends, and family,
And thou hast been the heir of all this malice.
Can two such storms meet then, and part with kissing?
You have the mightier hand.
And so Isle use it.
I cannot hinder ye: less can I beg
Submissive at his knees that knows not honour;
That bears the stamp of man, and not his nature;
Ye may doe what ye please.
I will doe all.
And when you have done all, which is my poor ruin,
(For farther your base malice cannot venture)
Dishonours self will cry you out a coward.
Had thou been brave, and noble and an Enemy,
Thou would have sought me whilst I carried Arms,
Whilst my good Sword was my profession,
And then have cried out Pedro, I defy thee;
Then stuck Alphonso's quarrel on the point,
The mercenary anger thou serve under
To get his daughter. Then thou should have braved me,
And armed with all thy families hate upon me,
Done something worthy feat: Now poor and basely
Thou set Toils to betray me; and like the Peasant,
That dares not meet the Lyon in the face,
Digst crafty pit-fals: Thou sham'st the Spanish honour:
Thou hast neither point of man, nor conscience in thee.
Sir, sir, you're brave; ye plead now in a Sanctuary;
You think your Pilgrims bulwark can defend ye:
You will not find it so.
I look not for it.
The more unhallowed soul hast thou to offer it.
When you were bravest, sir, and your Sword sharpest,
I durst affront ye: when the Court Sun gilded ye,
And every cry was the young hopeful Pedro,
Alonsos sprightly son; then durst I meet ye,
When you were Master of this fame, and fashion,
And all your glories in the full Meridian,
The Kings proof-favour buckled on your body;
Had we then come to competition,
Which I have often sought.
And I desired too.
You should have seen this Sword, how ere you slight it,
And felt it too; sharper then sorrow felt it,
In execution quicker then thy scorns;
Thou should have seen all this, and shrunk to see it.
Then like a Gentleman I would have used thee,
And given thee the fair fortune of thy being,
Then with a Soldiers Arm I had honoured thee;
But since thou stealst upon me like a Spy,
And thiefe-like think that holy case shall carry thee
Through all my purposes, and so betray me,
Base as you act, thy end be, and I forget thee.
What poor evasions thou buildst on, to abuse me?
The goodness of a man ne'er taught these principles.
I come a Spy? durst any Noble spirit
Put on this habit, to become a Traitor?
Even in an Enemy show me this antipathy
Where there is Christian faith, and this not reverenced:
I come a Spy? no Roderigo, no,
A hater of thy person, a maligner?
So far from that, I brought no malice with me,
But rather when I meet thee, tears to soften thee;
When I put on this habit, I put off
All fires, all angers, all those starts of youth
That clapped too rank a bias to my being,
And drew me from the right mark all should aim at;
In stead of stubborn steel, I put on prayers;
For rash and hasty heats, a sweet repentance:
Long weary steps, and vows, for my vain-glories.
O Roderigo.
If thy tongue could save thee,
Prating be thy bail, thou hast a rare benefit.
Soldiers, come out, and bring a halter with ye;
Isle forgive your holy habit sir, but Isle hang you.
Wherefore this halter Captain?
For this traitor.
Go, put it on him, and then tie him up:
Do you want a Band sir? this is a course wearing,
Twill fit but scurvily upon this collar;
But patience is as good as a French Pickadell.
What's his fault, Captain?
Tic my will he perish,
And thats his fault.
A Captain of good government.
Come Soldiers, come, ye are roughly bred, and bloody,
Show your obedience, and the joy ye take
In executing impious commands;
Ye have a Captain seals your liberal pardons,
Be no more Christians, put religion by,
Twill make ye cowards: feel no tenderness,
Nor let a thing called conscience trouble ye;
Alas, twill breed delay. Bear no respect
To what I seem: were I a Saint indeed,
Why should that stagger ye? you know not holiness:
To be excellent in evil, is your goodness;
And be so, twill become ye: have no hearts,
For fear you should repent: that will be dangerous:
For if there be a knocking there, a pricking,
And that pulse beat back to your considerations,
How ye have laid a stiff hand on Religion—
Truss him I say.
And violated faith,
hear him not prate.
Why, what a thing will this be?
What strange confusion then will breed among ye?
Will none of ye obey?
What devils vex ye?
The fears ye live in and the hourly dangers
Will be delights to these: those have their ends,
But these outlive all time, and all repentance:
And if it creep into your conscience once,
Be sure ye locke that close.
Why stand ye gazing?
Farewell sleep, peace, all that are humane comforts,
Better ye had been Trees, or Stones, and happier;
For those die here, and seek no further being,
Nor hopes, nor punishments.
Rots take ye Rascals.
What would you have us do?
Dispatch the praetor.
And have religious blood hang on our consciences?
We are bad enough already: sins enough
To make our graves even loath us.
No man love me?
Although I be a thief, I am no hangman;
They are two men's trades, and let another execute.
Lay violent hands on holy things?
Base Cowards,
Put to your powers, ye Rascals, I command ye.
Holy, or unholy, if I say it,
Isle have it done.
If I do it, let me starve for it.
Or I.
Or I: we will obey things handsome,
And bad enough, and over doe obedience:
But to be made such instruments of mischief.
I have done as many villainies as another,
And with as little reluctation,
Let me come clear of these, and wipe that score off.
Put me upon a felt and known perdition?
Have ye conspired, ye slaves?
How wildly this shows,
In one that would command another temper,
And bear no bound in's own?
Am I thus jaded?
Is it my life thou long for Roderigo?
And can no sacrifice appease thy malice,
But my blood spilt? doe it thy self, dispatch it;
And as thou takst the whole revenge unto thee,
Take the whole sin upon thee; and be mighty,
Mighty in evil, as thou art in anger:
And let not these poor wretches houle for thy sake.
Those things that in thine own glass seem most monstrous,
Would thou abuse their weak sights with, for amiable?
Is it, thou think to fear me with thy terrors,
And into weak condition draw my virtue?
If I were now to learn to die I would sue to thee:
Or did I fear death, then I would make thee glorious.
But knowing what, and how far I can suffer;
And all my whole life being but deaths preface,
My sleep but at next door.
Are ye so valiant?
Isle make ye feel: Isle make ye know, and feel too;
And Rascals, you shall tremble. Keep him here,
And keep him safe too: if he scope your guards—
Fear not, I will not.
As I live, ye die for it;
I will not be thus baffled. 
What a devil have ye done, Pilgrim? or what mischief
Have you conspired, that he should rage and rave thus?
Have you kilt his father, or his mother? or strangled any of his kindred?
Has he no sisters? have you not been bouncing
About their belly pieces?
Why should that be dangerous
Or any way deserve death? is it not natural?
Bar us the Christian liberty of women,
And build us up with bricK, take away our free-stone.
Because thou art holier then he, upon my conscience
He dos not envy thee: that's not his quarrel;
For, look you, that might be cōpounded without prayers.
Nor that thou seem an honester man: for here
We have no trading with such Tinsell-stuffe;
To be an excellent thief, is all we aim at.
Wilt thou take a spit: and stride, and see if thou can outrun us?
I scorn to shift his fury, keep your obedience;
For though your government admit no president,
Keep your selves careful in it.
Thou will be hanged then.
I cannot die with fewer faults upon me.
Tic ten to one he will shoot him: for the devil's in him
If he hang him himself.
He has too proud a nature:
He will compel some one.
I am confident.
And so are all I think.
Be not molested,
If I must die, let it not trouble you;
It stirs not me: It is the end I was born for.
Only this honest office I desire ye,
(If there be courtesy in men of your breed)
To see me buried; not to let his fury
Expose my body to the open violence
Of beasts, and fowls: so far I urge humanity.
He shall not deny us that: we will see ye under ground
And give ye a volley of as good cups of Sack,
For that's our Discipline.
He comes again,
As high in rage as ever; the boy with him.
Will he compel the child?
He is bent to doe it,
And must have some body.
If thou love me doe it:
Love me, or love me not, I say thou shalt doe it:
Stare not, nor stagger, sir; if ye deny me,
Doe you see this Rogue?
What would ye have me doe sir?
Heavens goodness bless me.
Doe? why hang a Rascal,
That would hang me.
I am a boy, and weak, sir.
Thou art strong enough to tie him to a Bough,
And turn him off: come, thou shalt be my Jewel,
And Isle allow thee horse, and all thy pleasures,
And twenty gallant things: Isle teach thee arms too;
Make thee mine heir.
Let me inherit death first.
Make me not angry, sirha.
Which is the man, sir?
Isle pluck up the best heart I can yet.
Fear not,
It is my will: That in the Pilgrims coat there,
That devil in the Saints skin.
Guard me goodness.
Dispatch him presently.
I wait your worst, sir.
will the boy doe it? is the rogue so confident?
So young, so deep in blood?
He shakes, and trembles.
Dost thou seek more coals still to sear thy consci∣ence,
Work sacred innocence, to be a devil?
Doe it thy self for shame, thou best becomst it.
Sirha, I scorn my finger should be filed with thee;
And yet Isle have it done: this child shall strangle thee,
A crying Girl, if she were here should master thee.
How should I save him? how my self from violence?
Leave your tongue-valour, &amp; dispatch your hate, sir;
The patience of my death, shall more torment thee,
(Thou painted honour, thou base man made backward)
Then all my life has feared thee.
Gag him, sirha.
The Boy looks cheerfully now: sure he will do it.
He will mall him else.
Are ye prepared to die, sir?
Yes boy, and ready; prithee to thy business.
Why are ye then so angry? so perplexed, sir?
Patience wins Heaven, and not the heat of passion.
Why doe you rail?
The boy's a pretty Priest.
I thank ye gentle child, you teach me truly.
You seem to fear too.
Thou see more, then I feel, boy.
You tremble sure.
No sure boy, tic thy tenderness:
Prithee make haste, and let that gulf be satisfied.
Are ye so willing to go to it?
Most willing:
I would not borrow from his courtesy
One hour of life, to gain an age of glory.
And is your reckoning straight sir?
As straight as truth, boy:
I cannot go more joyfully to a wedding.
Then to your prayers: Isle dispatch ye presently.
Now guide my tongue, thou blessedness.
A good boy.
But hark ye sir, one word; and pray ye resolve me.
Let me speak privately.
What would thou have child?
Shall this man die?
Why dost thou make that question?
Pray ye be not angry: if he must, Isle doe it.
But must he now?
What else? who dare reprieve him?
Pray ye think again; and as your injuries
Are great, and full, you suffer from this fellow,
Doe not ye purpose so to suit your vengeance?
I doe, and must.
You cannot if he die now.
Cannot?
No, cannot: be not vexed, you'll find it.
I have considered, and I know it certain,
Ye suffer below him: lose all your angers.
Why my best boy?
I love, and tender ye,
I would not tell ye else. Is that revenge,
To slight your cause, and Saint your enemy,
Clap the Doves wings of downy peace unto him,
And let him soar to Heaven, whilst you are sighing?
Is this revenge?
I would have him die.
Prepared thus?
The blessing of a father never reached it:
His contemplation now scorns ye, contemns ye,
And all the tortors ye can use. Let him die thus;
And these that know and love revenge will laugh at ye:
Here lies the honour of a wel-bred anger,
To make his enemy shake and tremble under him;
Doubt: nay, almost despair, and then confound him.
This man ye rock asleep, and all your rages
Are Requiems to his parting soul, mere Anthems.
Indeed he is strongly built.
You cannot shake him;
And the more weight ye put on his foundation,
Now as he stands, ye fix him still the stronger;
If ye love him, honour him, would heap upon him
Friendships and benefits beyond example,
Hope him a Star in Heaven, and there would stick him,
Now take his life.
I had rather take mine own, Boy.
Isle ease him presently.
Stay, be not hasty.
Bless my tongue still.
What has the boy done to him?
How dull, and still he looks?
You are a wise man.
And long have buckled with the worlds extremities,
A valiant man, and no doubt know both fortunes,
And would ye work your Master-peece thus madly,
Take the bare name of honour, that will pity ye
When the world knows ye have preyed on a poor Pile∣grim?
The Boy has staggard me: what would thou have me?
Have ye? do you not feel Sir? do's it not stir ye?
Doe you ask a child? I would have ye do most bravely,
Because I most affect ye: like your self Sir,
Scorn him, and let him go; seem to contemn him,
And now ye have made him shake, seal him his pardon,
When he appears a subject fit for Anger,
And fit for you, his pious Armour off,
His hopes no higher then your sword may reach at
Then strike, and then ye know revenge; then take it.
I hope I have turned his mind.
Let the fool go there,
I scorn to let loose so base an anger
May light on thee: See me no more, but quit me;
And when we meet again.
I'll thank ye Captain. 
Why this was like your self: but which way goes he?
Shall we ne'er happy meet?
I am drowsy; Boy,
Go with me, and discourse: I like thy company
O Child! I love thy Tongue.
I shall waite on ye. 
The Boy has don't: a Plaguey witty Rascal.
And I shall love him terribly.
It was he most certain,
For if ye mark, how earnest he was with him,
And how he laboured him.
A cutting villain,
But a good Rogue; This Boy will mike's all honest.
I scarce believe that: but I like the Boy well
Come, let's to Supper; then upon our watches.
This Pilgrim escaped a joyful one.
Let's Drink round,
To the Boys health, and then about our business.
None of you know her?
Alas Sir, we never saw her:
Nor ever heard of her, but from your report.
No happy eye?
I doe not think it is she, Sir,
Me thinks a woman dares not.
Thou speak poorly,
What dares not woman, when she is provoked?
Or what seems dangerous to Love, or fury?
That it is she, this has confirmed me certain,
These Jewels here, a part of which I sent her,
And though unwilling, yet her Father wrought her
To take, and wear.
A wench, and we not know it?
And among us? where were our understandings?
I could have guessed unhappily: have had some feeling
In such a matter: Here are as pretty fellows,
At the discovery of such a Jigambob:
A handsome wench too? sure we have lost our faculties,
We have no motions: what should she doe here, Sir?
That's it that troubles me: O that base Rascal!
There lies the misery: how cunningly she quit him,
And how she urged? had ye been constant to me,
I ne'er had suffered this.
Ye might have hanged him:
And would he had been hanged, that's all we care for it:
So our hands had not don't.
She is gone again too,
And what care have ye for that? gone, and contemned me;
Mastered my will, and power, and now laughs at me.
The devil that brought her hither, Sir I think
Has carried her back again invisible,
For we ne'er knew, nor heard of her departure.
No living thing came this night through our watches
She went with you:
Was by me till I slept,
But when I waked, and called: O my dull pate here,
If I had opened this when it was given me,
This Roguy Box. 
We could but give it ye.
Pilgrim? a Pox O Pilgrims there the game goes,
There's all my fortune fled; I know it, I feel it.
Bring me unto thy Captain: whore's thy Captain?
I am foundered, melted, some fairy thing or other
Has led me dancing; the devil has haunted me
In the likeness of a voice: give me thy Captain.
He's here Sir, there he stands.
How dost thou Captain?
I have been fooled and jaded, made a dog bolt.
My daughters run away: I have been haunted too,
I have lost my horse; I am hungry, &amp; out of my wits also.
Come in; I'll tell you what I know: strange things
And take your ease; I'll follow her recovery,
These shall be yours the whilst, and do ye service.
Let me have drink enough: I am almost choked too.
You shall have any thing; what think you now, Soldiers?
I think a woman, is a woman that's any thing.
The next we take, we will search a little nearer,
We will not be boyed again with a pair of breeches. 
He's gone in here: This is Roderigo's quarter,
And i'll be with him soon: I'll startle him,
A little better then I have done: All this long night again,
I have led him out of the way, to try his patience,
And made him swear, and curse; and pray, and swear
And cry for anger; I made him leave his horse too,
Where he can never find him more; whistled to him,
And then he would run through thick &amp; thin, to reach me,
And down in this ditch; up again, and shake him,
And swear some certain blessings; then into that bush
Pop goes his pate, and all his face is combed over,
And I sit laughing: a hundred tricks, I have served him:
And I will double em, before I leave him;
I'll teach his anger to dispute with women,
But all this time, I cannot meet my Mistress,
I cannot come to comfort her; that grieves me,
For sure she is much afflicted: till I doe,
I'll haunt thy Ghost Alphonso; I'll keep thee waking,
Yes, I must get a Drum: I am villainous weary,
And yet i'll trot about these villages
Till I have got my will, and then have at ye.
I'll make your anger drop out at your elbows ere I leave ye. 
It is strange, in all the circuit we have ridden,
We cannot cross her: no way light upon her:
I doe not think she is gone thus far, or this way,
For certain if she had, we should have reached her
Made some discovery: heard some news; we have seen, nothing.
Nor pass by any body that could promise any thing.
She is certainly disguised, her modesty
Durst never venture else.
Let her take any shape,
And let me see it once, I can distinguish it.
So should I think too: has not her father found her?
No, i'll be hanged then; he has no patience
Unless she light in's teeth, to look about him.
He guesses now, and chafes and frets like Tinsel.
Let him go on, he cannot live without it.
But keep her from him, heaven: where are we Curi?
In a wood I think, hang me if I know else.
And yet I have ridden all these Coasts, at all hours,
And had and aim.
I would we had a guide,
And if I be not much awry Seberto,
Not far off should be Rodorigo's quarter,
For in this Fastwes if I be not cozened,
He and his Out-laws live.
This is the place then 
We appointed him to meet in.
Yes, I think so:
Would we could meet some living thing: what's that there?
A Boy, I think, stay; why may not he direct us.
I am hungry, and I am weary, and I cannot find him.
Keep my wits heaven, I feel 'em wavering,
O God my head.
Boy, dost thou hear, thou stripling?
Now they will tear me, torture me, now Roderigo
Will hang him without mercy; ha:
Come hither.
A very pretty Boy: what place is this, child?
And whether dost thou travel? how he stares!
Some stubborn Master has abu'd the Boy,
And beaten him: how he complains! whether goosed thou?
I go to Segonia Sir, to my sick Mother,
I have been taken here by drunken thieves,
And (O my bones;) I have been beaten Sir.
Mis-us'd, &amp; robed: extremely beaten Gentlemen,
O God, my side!
What beasts would use a Boy thus?
Look up, and be of good cheer:
O, I cannot.
My back, my back, my back.
What thieves?
I know not.
But they call the Captain Roderigo.
Look ye,
I know we were there abouts;
Dost thou want any thing?
Nothing but ease, but ease, Sir.
There's some money,
And get thee to thy Mother.
I thank ye Gentlemen:
This was extremely foul, to vex a Child thus.
Come, let's along, we cannot loose our way now. 
Though ye are honest men, I fear your fingers,
And glad I am got off; O how I tremble!
Send me but once within his arms dear Fortune,
And then come all the world: what shall I do now?
It is almost night again, and where to lodge me, 
Or get me meat, or any thing, I know not.
These wild woods, and the fancies I have in me,
Will run me mad.
Boy, Boy:
More set to take me?
Dost thou hear Boy; thou pointer.
It is a Boy too,
A Lackey Boy: I need not fear his fierceness.
Can thou beat a Drum?
A Drum?
This thing, a drum here.
Did thou never see a Drum: Can thou make this grumble?
Iulettas face, and tongue; Is she run mad too?
Here may be double craft: I have no skill in it.
I'll give thee a Royal but to go along with me.
I care not for thy Royal, I have other business,
Drum to thy self, and dance to it.
Sirha, Sirha.
Thou scurvy Sitha; thou snotty-nos'd scab, dost thou hear me?
If I lay down my Drum. 
Here comes more Company,
I fear a plot, heaven send me fairly from it. 
Basto; who's here?
Captain, do you need me Father?
No not a foot: give me the gown: the sword now.
This is the devil thief, and if he take me,
Woe be to my Gally-gaskins.
Certain Sir,
She will take her patches of, and change her habit.
Let her do what she please: No, no Alinda
You cannot cozen me again in a Boys figure,
Nor hide the beauty of that face in patches,
But I shall know it.
A Boy his face in patches?
Nor shall your tongue again bewitch mine Anger,
If she be found in the woods, send me word presently,
And i'll return; she cannot be far gone yet,
If she be not, expect me, when ye see me,
Use all your service to my friend Alphonso,
And have a care to your business: farewell,
No more, farewell. Exeunt.
I am heartily glad thou art gone yet.
This Boy in patches, was the Boy came by me,
The very same, how hastily it shifted?
What a mopp'-eyed ass was I, I could not know her,
This must be she, this is she, now I remember her,
How loath she was to talk too, how she feared me?
I could now peace mine eyes out for mere anger:
I'll follow her, but who shall vex her father then?
One flourish at him, and then I am for the voyage,
If I can cross the Captain too: Come Tabor. Exit.
Are they all set?
All, and each quarter quiet.
Is the old man asleep?
An hour ago Sir.
We must be very careful in his absence,
And very watchful.
It concerns us nearly,
He will not be long from us.
No, he cannot,
A little heate of love, which he must wander out. 
And then again: hark.
What?
Tic not the wind sure:
That's still and calm▪ no noise, nor flux of waters.
I hear a Drum, I think.
That that;
It beats again now.
Now it comes nearer: sure we are surprised, sir;
Some from the Kings command: we are lost, we are
dead all.
Hark, hark, a charge now: my Captain has betrayed us.
And left us to this ruin, run away from us.
Another beats o'that side.
Fly, fly, Jaques,
We are taken in a toil: snapped in a pitfall;
Methinks I feel a Sword already shave me.
A thousand horse and foot, a thousand pioners,
If we get underground, to fetch us out again;
And every one an Axe to cut the woods down.
This is the dismalst night— 
Whore's my nag now?
And what make I here to be hanged? What devil
brought me into this danger? Is there ne'er a hole?
That I may creep in deep enough, and the quickly?
Ne'er an old ditch to choke in? I shall be taken
For their Commander now, their General,
And have a commanding Gallows set up for me
As high as a May-pole; and nasty Songs made on me,
Be printed with a Pint-pot and a dagger.
They are all killed by this time: Can I pray?
Let me see that first: I have too much fear to be faithful.
Whore's all my State now? I must go hunt for daughters;
Daughters, and damsels of the Lake, damned daughters.
A hundred Crowns for a good tod of Hay,
Or a fine hollow Tree, that would contain me;
I hear 'em coming: I feel the noose about me.
Why do you fear, and fly? here are no Soldiers;
None from the King to vex ye.
The Drum, the Drum, sir.
I never saw such Pigeon-hearted people:
What Drum? what danger? who's that that shakes behind there:
Mercy upon me sir, why are ye feared thus?
Are we all killed, no mercy to be hoped for?
Am I not shot do you think?
You are strangely frighted,
Shot with a fiddle stick: who's here to shoot ye?
A Drum we saw indeed, a boy was beating it,
And hunting Squirrels by Moon-light.
Nothing else, sir?
Not any thing: no other person stirring.
O that I had that boy: this is that Devil,
That fairy rogue, that haunted me last night;
He has sleeves like Dragons wings.
A little Foot-boy.
Come, let's go in, and let me get my clothes on;
If ere I stay here more to be thus martyred -
Did ye not meet the wench?
No sure, we met her not.
She has been here in boys apparel, Gentlemen,
A gallant thing, and famous for a Gentlewoman,
And all her face patched over for discovery:
A pilgrim too, and thereby hangs a circumstance,
Tha she hath played her master-prize, a rare one.
I came too short.
Such a young boy we met sir.
In a gray hat.
The same: his face all patched too.
It was she, a rot run with her; she: that rank she;
Walk in, Isle tell ye all: and then we will part again,
But get some store of Wine: this fright sits here yet. 
What a fright I have put 'em in; what a brave hurry.
If this doe bolt him, Isle be with him again
With a new part, was never played; Isle ferk him.
As he hunts her, so isle hunt him: Isle claw him.
Now will I see if I can cross her footing:
Yet still isle watch his water, he shall pay for it;
And when he thinks most malice, and means worse,
Isle make him know the Mare's the better Horse. 
Ye are a stranger sir, and for humanity,
Being come within our walls, I would show you something.
Ye have seen the Castle?
Yes sir, tic astrong one,
And well maintained.
Why are you still thus sad, sir?
How doe ye like the walks?
They are very pleasant;
Your Town stands cool and sweet.
But that I would not
Affect you with more sadness, I could show ye
A place worth view.
Shows seldom alter me sir;
Pray ye speak it, and then show it.
Tic a house here
Where people of all sorts, that have been visited
With lunacies and follies waite their cures,
Their's fancies of a thousand stamps and fashions,
Like flies in several shapes buzz round about ye,
And twice as many gestures; some of pity,
That it would make ye melt to see their passions:
And some as light again, that would content ye.
But I see sir, your temper is too modest,
Too much inclined to contemplation,
To meet with these?
You could not please me better;
And I beseech you sir, doe me the honour
To let me waite upon ye.
Since ye are willing,
To me it shall be a pleasure to conduct ye.
I never had such a mind yet to see misery. 
Carry mad Bess some meat, she rores like Thunder;
And tie the Parson short, the Moone's ith full,
He has a thousand Pigs in's brains: Who looks to the Prentice?
Keep him from women, he thinks he has lost his Mistress,
And talk of no silk stuffs, twill run him horn mad.
The Justice keeps such a stir yonder with his Charges,
And such a coil with warrants,
Take away his Statutes;
The devil has possessed him in the likeness
Of penal Laws: keep him from Aquavit,
For if that spirit creep into his corum,
He will commit us all: how is it with the Scholar?
For any thing I see, he's in his right wits.
Thou art an ass; in's right wits, goodman coxcomb?
As though any man durst be in's right wits, and be here.
It is as much as we dare be that keep 'em.
Give me some drink.
O, there's the English man.
Fill me a thousand pots, and froth 'em, froth 'em.
Down of your knees, ye rogues, and pledge me roundly;
One, two, three, and four; we shall be an merry within this hour.
To the great Turk.
Peace, peace, thou Heathen drunkard;
These English are so Malt-mad, there's no meddling with 'em;
When they have a fruitful year of Barley there,
All the whole Island's thus.
A Snuff, a snuff, a snuff.
A lewd notorious snuff: gived him again, boy.
God-ye-good even, Goffer.
Who let the Fool loose?
If any of the mad-men take her, she is peppered,
They'll bounce her loins.
Will ye walk into the cole house?
She is as lecherous too as a she-ferret.
Who a vengeance looks to her? go in Kate,
Isle give thee a fine Apple.
Will ye bus me?
And tickle me, and make me laugh?
Isle whip ye.
Fool, fool, come up to me fool.
Are ye peeping?
Isle get thee with five fools.
O fine, O dainty.
And thou shalt lie in in a horse-cloth, like a Lady
And shall I have a Coach?
Drawn with four Turkeys,
And they shall tread thee too.
We shall have eggs then;
And shall I sit upon 'em?
I, I, and they shall be all addle,
And make an admirable Tansy for the devil.
Come come away, I am taken with thy love fool,
And will mightily belabour thee.
How the fool bridles? how she twitters at him?
These Englishmen would stagger a wise-woman.
If we should suffer her to have her will now,
We should have all the women in Spain at mad as she here,
They would strive who should be most fool: away with her.
Pray ye stay a little: lets hear him sing, he has a fine breast.
Here comes my Master, to the spit ye whore,
And stir no more abroad, but tend your business;
Your shall have no more sops in the pan else, nor no porrige:
Besides, Isle whip your breech.
Isle go in presently.
Isle assure ye sir, the Cardinal's angry with ye
For keeping this young man.
I am heartily sorry.
If ye allow him sound, pray ye take him with ye.
This is the place, and now observe their humours:
We can find nothing in him light, nor tainted;
No startings, nor no rubs, in all his answers,
In all his Letters nothing but discretion,
Learning, and handsome stile.
Be not deceived sir,
Mark but his look.
His grief, and his imprisonment
May stamp that there.
Pray talk with him again then.
That will be needless, we have tried him long enough,
And if he had a taint we should have met with it.
Yet to discharge your care —
A sober youth:
Pity so heavy a cross should light upon him.
You find no sickness?
None sir, I thank Heaven,
Nor nothing that diverts my understanding.
Doe you sleep a nights?
As sound, and sweet, as any man:
Have ye no fearful dreams?
Sometimes, as all have
That go to bed with raw and windy stomachs;
Else, I am all one piece.
Is there no unkindness
You have conceived from any friend or parent?
Or scorn from what ye loved?
No, truly sir:
I never yet was master of a faith
So poor, and weak, to doubt my friend or kindred,
And what love is, unless it lie in learning
I think I am ignorant.
This man is perfect,
A civiller discourser I ne'er talked with.
You'll find it otherwise.
I must tell ye true sir,
I think ye keep him here to teach him madness.
Here's his discharge from my Lord Cardinal;
And come sir, go with us.
I am bound unto ye,
And farewell Master.
Farewell Stephano,
Alas poor man.
What flaws, and whirls of weather,
Or rather storms have been aloft these three days;
How dark, and hot, and full of mutiny!
And still grows louder.
It has been stubborn weather.
Strange work at Sea, I fear me there's old tumbling.
Bless my old uncles Bark, I have a venture.
And I more then I would wish to lose.
Doe you fear?
Ha! how he looks?
Nay, mark him better Gentlemen.
Mercy upon me: how his eyes are altered?
Now tell me how ye like him: whether now
He be that perfect man ye credited?
Doe's the Sea staggger ye?
Now ye have hit the nick.
Doe ye fear the billows?
What ails him? who has stirred him?
Be not shaken,
Nor let the singing of the storm shoot through ye,
Let it blow on, blow on: let the clouds wrestle,
And let the vapours of the earth turn mutinous,
The Sea in hideous niountaines rise and tumble
Upon a Dolphins back, Isle make all tremble,
For I am Neptune.
Now what think ye of him?
A las poor man.
Your Bark shall plough through all,
And not a Surge so saucy to disturb her.
Isle see her safe, my power shall sail before her.
Down ye angry waters all,
Ye loud whistling whirlwinds fall;
Down ye proud Waves, ye storms cease;
I command ye, be at peace.
Fright not with your churlish Notes,
Nor bruise the Keel of Bark that flotes:
No devouring Fish come nigh,
Nor Monster in my Empery,
Once show his head, or terror bring;
But let the weary Sailor sing:
Amphitrite with white arms
Srike my Lute, Isle sing Charms.
He must have Music now: I must observe him.
His fit will grow to full else. 
I must pity him.
Now he will in himself most quietly,
And clean forget all, as he had done nothing.
We are sorry, sir: and we have seen a wonder;
From this hour we will believe, and so we will leave ye. 
This was a strange fit.
Did ye mark him sir?
He might have cozened me with his behaviour.
Many have sworn him right, and I have thought so:
Yet on a sudden, from some word, or other,
When no man could expect a sit, he has flown out:
I dare not give him will.
Pray Heaven recover him.
Must I come in too?
No, my pretty Lad;
Keep in thy chamber Boy: shalt have thy supper.
I pray ye what is he sir?
A strange boy, that last night
Was found in the Town, a little crazed, distracted,
And so sent hither.
How the pretty knave looks,
And plays, and peepes upon me! sure such eyes
I have seen, and loved: what fair hands? certainly—
Good sir, you'll make him worse.
I pray believe not.
Alas, why should I hurt him? how he smiles?
The very shape, and sweetness of Alinda:
Let me look once again: were it in such clothes
As when I saw her last; this must be she.
How tenderly it strokes me?
Pray ye be mild sir;
I must attend elsewhere. 
Pray ye be secure sir,
What would ye say? how my heart beats and trembles?
He holds me hard by the hand; O my life, her flesh too!
I know not what to think: her tears, her true ones;
Pure orient tears: Hark, doe you know me little one?
O Pedro Pedro!
O my soul!
What fit's this?
The Pilgrims off the hooks too.
Let me hold thee,
And now come all the world, and all that hate me.
Be wise, and not discovered: O how I love ye!
How doe ye now?
I have been miserable;
But your most virtuous eyes have cured me, Pedro:
Pray ye think it no immodesty, I kiss ye,
My head's wild still.
Be not so full of passion,
Nor do not hang so greedily upon me;
Twill be ill taken.
Are ye weary of me?
I will hang here eternally, kiss ever,
And weep away for joy.
I told ye sir,
What ye would doe: for shame doe not afflict him;
You have drawn his fit upon him fearfully:
Either depart, and presently; Isle force ye else.
Who waits within?
Alas good sir.
This is the way never to hope recovery.
Stay but one minute more, Isle complain to the Governor.
Bring in the boy: doe you see how he swells, and tears himself?
Is this your cure? Be gon; if the boy miscarry
Let me ne'er find you more, for isle so hamper ye —
You were too blame: too rash.
Farewell for ever. 
You are now within a mile of the Town sir: if my business
Would give me leave, I would turn and waite upon ye;
But for such Gentlemen as you enquire of,
Certain, I saw none such: But for the boy ye spoke of,
I will not say tic he, but such a one;
Just of that height.
In such clothes?
I much mistake else,
Was sent in the other night, a little maddish,
And where such people waite their cures.
I understand ye.
There you may quickly know.
I thank ye sir.
So doe I to: and if there be such a place,
I ask no more; but you shall hear more of me.
She may be there, and you may play the tyrant;
Isle see what I can doe: I am almost foundered
In following him; and yet Isle never leave him,
Isle crawl of all four first; my cause is meritorious,
And come what can come.
All you have told me is certain;
Complexion, and all else.
It may be she then;
And isle so fumble her: Is she grown mad now?
Is her blood set so high? isle have her matted,
Isle have her wormed.
Mark but the end, old Master,
If thou be not sick of the Bots within these five hours,
And kickst and roar'st; Isle make ye fart fire, Signior,
Here's one of the house, a fool, an idiot sir;
May be she is going home; she'll be a guide to ye;
And so I kiss your hand. 
I am your servant.
O now I am lost, lost, lost, Lord, how I tremble!
My father, armed in all his hates and angers;
This is more misery then I have escaped yet.
Fool, fool.
He knows me not; will ye give me two-pence?
And gaffer, here's a Crow-flower, and a Daisy;
I have some pie in my pocket too.
This is an arrant fool,
An ignorant thing.
Believe so, and I am happy.
Dost thou dwell in Sigonia, fool?
No no, I dwell in Heaven.
And I have a fine little house, made of Marmalade.
And I am a lone woman, and I spin for Saint Peter;
I have a hundred little children, and they sing Psalms with me.
Tic pity this pretty thing should want understanding.
But why doe I stand talking with a coxcomb?
If I doe find her, if I light upon her,
Isle say no more. Is this the way to the Town, fool?
You must go over the top of that high steeple, Gaffer.
A plague of your fools face.
No, take her counsel.
And then you shall come to a River twenty mile over,
And twenty mile &amp; ten: and then you must pray, Gaffer;
And still you must pray, and pray.
Pray Heaven deliver me
From such an ass, as thou art.
Amen, sweet Gaffer.
And fling a sop of Suger-cake into it;
And then you must leap in naked.
Would he would believe her.
And sink seven days together; can ye sink gaffer?
Yes coxcomb, yes; prithee farewell: a pox on thee.
A plague of that fool too, that set me upon thee.
And then Isle bring you a sup of Milk shall serve ye:
I am going to get Apples.
Go to the devil:
Was ever man tormented with a puppy thus?
Thou tell me news? thou be a guide?
And then Nunkle —
Prithee keep on thy way (good Naunt) I could rail now
These ten hours at mine own improvidence:
Get Apples, and he choked: farewell. 
Farewell Nuncle.
I rejoice in any thing that vexes him;
And I shall love this fool extremely for it:
Could I but see my Mistress now, to tell her
How I have truly, honestly wrought for her,
How I have worn my self away, to serve her.
Fool, there's a Royal for the sport thou made me,
In crossing that old fool, that parted from thee.
Thou art honest sure; but yet thou must not see me:
I thank ye little Gentleman: Heaven bless ye
And isle pray for ye too: pray ye keep this Nutmeg,
It was sent me from the Lady of the Mountain.
A golden Lady.
How prettily it prattles.
Tic very good to rub your understanding:
And so good night: the Moone's up.
Pretty innocent.
Now fortune, if thou dare do good, protect me.
Isle follow him to yond Town: he shall not scope me:
Stay, I must counterfeit a Letter by the way first,
And one that must carry some credit with it: I am wide else,
And all this to no purpose that I aim at.
A Letter must be had, and neatly handled:
And then if Goodwife fortune doe not fail me,
Have at his skirts: I shall worse anger him
Then ever I have done, and worse torment him.
It do's me good to think how I shall conjure him.
And crucify his crabbednesse: he's my Master,
But that's all one: Isle lay that on the left hand.
He would now persecute my harmless Mistress,
A fault without forgiveness, as I take it;
And under that bold banner flies my vengeance,
A meritorious war, and so Isle make it.
In the name of Innocence, what's this the fool gave me?
She said it was good to rub my understanding.
What strange concealment? Bread or Cheese, or a Chestnut?
Ha! tic a Ring: a pretty Ring, a right one:
A ring I know too! the very same Ring:
O admirable Blockhead! O base eyes!
A Ring my Mistress took from me, and wore it;
I know it by the Posy: Prick me, and heal me.
None could deliver this, but she her self too:
Am I twice sand-blind? twice so near the blessing
I would arrive at? and block-like never know it?
I am veng'ance angry, but that shall light on thee,
And heavily, and quickly, I pronounce it:
There are so many cross ways, there's no following her:
And yet I must not now: I hope she is right still,
For all her outward show, for sure she knew me;
And in that hope, some few hours Isle forget her. 
She is not to be recovered, which I vex at;
And he beyond my veng'ance, which torments me:
O! I am fooled and slighted, made a Rascal;
My hopes are flatterd, as my present fortunes:
Why should I wander thus and play the coxcomes?
Tire out my peace and pleasure for a Girl?
A Girl that scorns me too? a thing that hates me?
And considered at the best, is but a short breakfast
For a hot appetite: why should I walk, and walk thus,
And fret my self, and travel like a Carrier,
And peep, and watch? want Meat, and Wine, to cherish me,
When thousand women may be had, ten thousand,
And thank me too, and I sit still: well, trim Beauty
And Chastity, and all that seem to ruin me,
Let me not take ye; let me not come near ye,
For Isle so trim ye: Isle so bussell with ye;
Tic not the name of Virgin shall redeem ye,
Isle change that property: nor tears, nor angers:
I bear a hate about me scorns those follies.
To find this villain too, for there's my main prize;
And if he snap me then.
Is not that Pedro?
Tic he, tic he: O!
What art thou?
Ha? now, now, now,
O now most miserable.
What a' devil art thou?
No end of my mis-fortunes, Heaven?
What Antique?
Speak Puppet, speak.
That habit to betray me?
Ye holy Saints, can ye see this?
It dances:
The devil in a fools Coat, is he turned Innocent?
What mops, and mowes it makes: heigh, how it frisked,
Is it it not a Faiery? or some small hobgoblin?
It has a mortal face, and I have a great mind to it,
But if it should prove the devil then.
Come hither.
I think 't will ravish me,
It is a handsome thing, but horribly Sun-burnt,
What's that it points at?
Dost thou see that Star there,
That, just above the Sun;
Prethe go thither, and light me this Tobacco,
And stop it with the horns of the Moon.
The thing's mad,
Abominably mad, her brains are buttered,
Go sleep, fool, sleep.
Thou can not sleep so sweetly:
For so I can say my Prayers, and then slumber.
I am not proud, nor full of wine,
This little Flower will make me fine:
Cruel in heart, for I shall cry,
If I see a Sparrow dye:
I am not watchful to due ill,
Nor glorious to pursue it still:
Nor pitiless to those that weep;
Such as are, bid them go sleep.
Doe, doe, do, and see if they can.
It said true,
I feel it sink into me forcibly.
Sure it is a kind of Sibill, some mad Prophet.
I feel my wildness bound, and fettered in me.
Give me your hand, and i'll tell you what's your fortune.
Here: prithee speak.
Fie, fie, fie, fie, fie.
Wash your hands, and pare your Nails, and look finely
You shall never kiss the Kings daughter else.
I wash 'em daily.
But still you foul 'em faster.
This goes nearer.
You'll have two wives.
Two wives?
I two fine gentle-women.
M•ke much of 'em: for they'll stick close to you Sir.
And these two, in two days.
That's a fine Riddle.
To day you shall wed sorrow,
And repentance will come to morrow.
Sure she's inspired.
I'll sing ye a fine Song Sir.
He called down his merry men all
By one, by two, by three,
William would fine have been the first,
But now the last is he.
This the mere Chronicle of my mis-hap.
I'll bid you good even: for my Boat stays for me yonder,
And I must Sup with the Moon to night in the Mediterraneum. 
When fools, and mad-folks shall be tutors to me,
And feel my sores, yet I unsensible;
Sure it was set by Providence upon me
To steer my heart right: I am wondrous weary.
My thoughts too, which add more burden to me:
I have been ill, and (which is worse) pursued it,
And still run on: I must think better, nobler,
And be another thing, or not at all. 
Still I grow heavier, heavier heaven defend me:
I'll lye down, and take rest: and goodness guard me.
We have escaped to day well: certain, if the Out-laws
Had known we had been stirring, we had paid for it,
Plague on 'em, they have robed me thrice,
And me five times:
Beside they made my daughter one of us too
An arrant Drum: O, they are the lewdest Rascals,
The Captain such a damned piece of iniquity:
But we are far enough of on 'em, that's the best on it,
They cannot hear.
They'll come to me familiarly
And eat up all I have: drink up my wine too,
And if there be a Servant that content 'em,
Let her keel hold, they'll give her Stowage enough:
We have no Children now, but Thieves, and Outlaws.
The very Brats in their Mothers bellies have their qualities.
They'll steal into the world.
Would we had some of 'em here,
I, Of that condition we could Master 'em,
They are sturdy knaves.
A devil take their sturdiness,
We can neither keep our wives from 'em, nor our States,
We pay the Rent, and they possess the benefit.
What's this lies here? is it drunk, or sober?
It sleeps, and soundly too.
It is an old woman
That keeps sheep hereabouts: it turns, and stretches.
Do's she keep sheep with a sword?
It has a Beard too.
Peace, peace: It is the devil Roderigo,
Peace of all hands, and look.
It is he
Speak softly,
Now we may fit him.
Stay, stay: let's be provident.
Kill him, and wake him then.
Let me come to him,
Even one blow at his pate, if ere he wake more.
So, so, so, lay that by.
I must needs kill him.
It stands with my reputation
Stand off, I say:
And let us some way make him sure; then torture him.
To kill him presently, has no pleasure in it.
Has been tormented of us, at least this twelve month.
Oh me!
He comes: he comes.
Has he no Guns about him?
Softly again: no, no: take that hand easily,
And tie it fast there: that to the other bough there.
Fast, fast, and easy least he wake.
Have we got ye?
This was a benefit we never aimed at.
Out with your knives, and let's carve this Cock-theefe,
Daintily carve him.
I would he had been used thus
Ten year ago; we might have thought we had children.
O, that Sir Nicholas now our Priest were here.
What a sweet Homily would he say over him,
For ringing all in with his wife in the Bell-frey?
He would stand up stiff girt: Now pounce him lightly,
And as he rores, and rages, let's go deeper:
Come near: you are dim eyed: on with your spectacles.
O, what torments me thus? what slaves, what villains?
O spare me, doe not murder me.
We'll but tickle ye,
You have tickled us at all points.
Where are his Emblems? 
As ye are men, and Christians
Yes we hear ye,
And you shall here of us too.
Oh no mercy.
What noise is this? what roar? I cannot find her,
She is got free again: but where, or which way?
Of villains, beasts.
Murdering a man, ye rascals?
Ye inhumane slaves, off, off, and leave this cruelty,
Or as I am a Gentleman: do ye brave me?
Then have among ye all, ye slaves, ye cowards,
Take up that sword, and stand: stay ye base rascals,
Ye cut-throat rogues.
Away, away. 
Ye dog-whelps:
Of I am how more wretched far, then ever.
A violence to that habit? ha? Roderigo,
What makes he here, thus lad? is it repentance,
Or only a fair show to guide his mischiefs?
This benefit has made me shame to see him,
To know him, blush?
You are not much hurt?
No Sir;
All I can call a hurt, sticks in my conscience,
That pricks, and tortuers me.
Have ye considerd
The nature of these men, and how they used ye?
Was it fair play? did it appear to you handsome?
I dare not speak: or if I do, tic nothing
Can bring me off, or justify me.
Was it noble
To be o're-layd with odds, and violence?
Manly, or brave in these thus to oppress ye?
Do you blush at this, in such as are mere rudeness,
That have stopped souls, that never knew things gentle?
And dare you glorify worse in your self sir?
Ye used me with much honour, and I thank ye,
In this I have requited some: ye know me:
Come turn not back, ye must, and ye shall know me;
Had I bin over second with base anger,
And suited all occasions to my mischiefs,
Bore no respect to Honesty, Religion,
No faith, no common tie of man, humanity,
Had I had in me, but given reins, and licence
To a tempestuous will, as wild as winter,
This day, know Roderigo, I had set
As small a price upon thy life, and fortunes,
As thou did lately on mine innocence;
But I reserve thee to a nobler service.
I thank ye, and i'll study more to honour ye:
You have the nobler soul, I must confess it,
And are the greater master of your goodness.
Though it be impossible I should now recover,
And my rude will grow handsome in an instant,
Yet touching but the pureness of your mettle,
Something shall show like gold, at least shall glister,
That men may hope, although the mine be rugged,
Stony, and hard to work: yet time, and honour
Shall find and bring forth that, that's rich and worthy.
I'll try that: and to 'th purpose: ye told me sir
In noble emulation, so I take it;
I'll put your hatred far off, and forget it,
You had a fair desire to try my valour:
You seemed to court me to it; you have found a time,
A weapon in your hand, an equal enemy,
That, as he puts this off, puts of all injuries,
And only now for honours sake defies ye:
Now, as you are a man, I know you are valiant,
As you are gentle bred, a soldier fashioned.
His virtue startles me. I dare fight Pedro.
And as you have a Mistress that you honour,
Mark me, a Mistress.
Ha?
A handsome Mistress,
As you dare hold your self deserving of her.
Deserving? what a word was that to fire me?
I could compel ye now without this circumstance,
But i'll deal free, and fairly, like a Gentleman:
As ye are worthy of the name ye carry,
A daring man.
O that I durst not suffer:
For all I dare do now, implies but penance.
Now do me noble right.
I'll satisfy ye:
But not by th'word: pray ye hear me, and allow me;
I have bin rude: but shall I be a monster,
And teach my sword to hurt that that preserved me?
Though I be rough by nature, shall my name
Inherit that eternal stain of barbarous?
Give me an enemy, a thing that hates ye,
That never heard of yet, nor felt your goodness,
That is one main antipathy to sweetness;
And set me on, you cannot hold me coward:
If I have ever erred, 'th as in hazard:
The temper of my sword starts at your virtue,
And will fly off, nay it will weep to light ye;
Things excellently mingled, and of pure nature,
Hold sacred love, and peace with one another.
See how it turns.
This is a strange conversion:
And can ye fail your Mistress? can ye grow cold
In such a case?
Those heats that they add to us,
(O noble Pedro) let us feel 'em rightly,
And rightly but consider how they move us.
Is not their honour ours?
If they be virtuous;
And then the sword ads nothing to their lustre,
But rather calls in question what's not doubted:
If they be not: the best swords, and best valours
Can never fight 'em up to fame again:
No, not a Christian war, and that's held pious.
How bravely now he is tempered? I must fight,
And rather make it honourable, then angry,
I would not task those sins to me committed.
You cannot sir: you have cast those by; decarded 'em,
And in a noble mind, so low and loosely
To look back, and collect such lumps, and lick 'em
Into new horrid forms again.
Still braver.
To fight, because I dare, were worse, and weaker
Then if I had a woman in my cause, sir,
And more proclaimed me fool; yet I must confess
I have bin covetous of all occasions,
And this I have taken upon trust, for noble,
The more shame mine; devise a way to fight thus,
That like the wounded air no blood may issue,
Nor where this sword shall enter, no lost spirit,
And set me on: I would not scar that body,
That virtuous, valiant body, nor deface it
To make the Kingdom mine: if one must bleed,
Let me be both the sacrifice, and altar,
And you the Priest: I have deserved to suffer.
The noble Roderigo, now I call ye,
And thus my love shall ever count, and hold ye,
I am your servant sir: and now this habit,
Devotion, not distrust shall put upon me,
I'll wait upon your fortunes, that's my way now,
And where your grieve, or joy, i'll be a partner.
I thank ye sir, I shall be too proud of ye,
O I could tell ye strange things.
I guess at 'em,
And I could curse my self, I made 'em stranger;
Yet my mind says, you are not far from happiness.
It shall be welcome; come, lets keep us thus still,
And be as we appear: Heavens hand may bless us. 
Yes sir, here be such people: but how pleasing,
They will appear to you.
Pray let me see'm,
I come to that end: pray let me see'em all.
They will confound ye sir, like bells rung backward
They are nothing but confusion, and mere noises.
May be I love a noise: but hark ye sir,
Have ye no boys, handsome young boys?
Yes one sir,
A very handsome boy.
Long here?
But two days;
A little crazed: but much hope of recovery.
I that boy, let me see: may be I know him;
That boy, I say: this is the boy he told me of,
And it must needs be she: that boy I beseech ye sir,
That boy I come to see.
And ye shall see him:
Or any else, but pray be not too violent.
I know what to do, I warrant ye: I am for all fancies:
I can talk to'em, and dispute.
As madly:
For they be very mad sir.
Let 'em be horn mad.
We have few Citizens: they have bedlams of their own sir,
And are mad at their own charges.
Who lies here?
Pray ye do not disturb'em sir, here lie such youths
Will make you start if they but dance their trenchmores.
Fetch out the boy, sirha: hark. 
Heigh boys. 
Bounce, 
Clap her of the Star-bord: bounce: top the can, Jenkin.
Dead ye dog, dead: do ye quarrel in my Kingdom?
Give me my trident.
Bounce, twixt wind and water,
Laden with Mackrels: O brave meat.
My Sea horses.
I'll charge the Northern wind, and break his bladder.
I'll sell my bells, before I be out-brav'd thus.
What's he? what's he?
A parson sir, a parson,
That run mad for tithe Goslings.
Green sawte cure him.
I'll curse ye all, i'll excommunicate ye:
Thou English heretic, give me the tenth pot.
Sue me, i'll drink up all, bounce I say once more,
O, have I split your mizzen? blow, blow thou West wind,
Blow till thou rive, and make the Sea run roaring.
I'll hiss it down again with a bottle of Ale.
Triton, why Triton.
Tritons drunk with metheglin.
Strike, strike the surges, strike.
Drink, drink, tic day light;
Drink, didle, didle, didle, drink, Parson, proud Parson:
A pigs tail in thy teeth, and I defy thee.
Give me some porridge, or i'll damn thee English.
How comes this English mad man here?
Alas thats no question:
They are mad every where sir;
Their fits are cool now: let 'em rest. 
Mad Gallants:
Most admirable mad: I love their faces.
Ye stinking whore: who knew of this? who looked to him?
Pox take him, he was sleepy when I left him,
Certain he made the fool drunk.
How now who's this here?
Where is the boy?
The boy sir?
I the boy, sir.
Here's all the boys we found.
These are his cloths.
But wher's the boy?
The boy is gone a maying,
He will bring me home a Cuckowes nest; do ye hear Master
I put my cloths off, and I dizend him,
And pind a plumb in's forehead, and a feather,
And buss'd him twice, and bid him go seek his fortune:
He gave me this fine money, and fine wine too,
And bid me sop: and gave me these trim cloths too,
And put 'em on.
Is this the boy you would show?
I'll give you two pence Master.
Am I foold of all sidies?
I met a fool in the woods, they said she dwelt here,
In a long pied coat.
That was the very boy, sir.
I, I, I, I gave him leave to play forsooth,
He will come again to morrow, and bring pescods.
I'll bring your bones.
Pox of your fools, and bedlams,
Plague of your owls and apes.
Pray ye sir, be tamer,
We cannot help this presently: but we shall know;
I'll recompense your cares too.
Know me a pudding.
You juggle, and ye fiddle: fart upon ye:
I am abused.
Pray ye sir. 
And I will be abused sir,
And yon shall know I am abused.
Whew, Mr. Keeper.
Pox of thy whews, and thy whims,
Pox of thy urship.
Give me some Ceeze, and Onions: give me some wash-brew,
I have — in my bellies: give me abundance,
Pendragon was a Gentleman, merge you sir,
And the Organs at Rixum were made by revelations,
There is a spirit blows, and blows the bellows,
And then they sing.
What Moon-cals's this? what dream?
Pray ye sir observe him,
He is a mountaineer, a man of Goteland.
I will beat thy face as black as a blew-clout,
I will leave no more sheet in thine eyes.
He will not hurt ye.
Give me a great deal of guns: thou art the devils,
I know thee by thy tails: poor Owei.'s hungry,
I will pig thy bums full of bullets.
This is the rarest rascal,
He speaks as if he had butter-milk in's mouth,
Is this any thing a kin to the English?
The elder brother, sir,
He run mad because a rat eat up's cheese.
H'ad a great deal of reason sir.
Basilus manus, is for an old codpice, mark ye,
I will borrow thy unships whore, to seal a Letter.
Now he grows villainous.
Me thinks he's best now.
Away with him.
He shall not.
Sir, he must.
I will sing, and dance:
Do any thing.
Wilt thou declaim in greek?
Away with the fool,
And whip her soundly sirah.
I'll tell no more tales. 
Or wilt thou fly in the ayre?
Do, and i'll catch thee,
And like a wisp of hay, i'll whirl, and whirl thee,
And pusse thee up: and puff thee up.
I'll save thee,
And thou shalt fall into the Sea, soft, softly.
I'll get upon a mountain and call my Country∣men.
They all grow wild: away with him for heaven sake,
Sir, ye are much too blame.
No, no, tic brave sir,
Ye have consent me; i'll make you mad.
In with him,
And lock him fast.
I'll see him in his lodging. 
What means this Gentleman? 
He's in: have at him,
Are you the Master, sir?
What would you with him?
I have a business from the Duke of Medina,
Is there not an old Gentleman come lately in?
Yes, and a wild one too; But not a prisoner.
Did you observe him well? tic like he may be.
I have seen younger men of better temper.
You have hit the cause I come for: ther's a letter
Pray ye peruse it well: I shall be with ye;
And suddenly, I fear not: finley, daintily,
I shall so feed your fierce vexation,
And raise your worships storms: J shall so niggle ye,
And juggle ye, and fiddle ye, and firck ye:
I'll make ye curse the hour yet vexed a woman;
I'll make ye stake, when our sex, are but sounded:
For the Lords sake, we shall have him at; I long to see it
As much as for my wedding night: I gape after it.
This Letter says the Gentleman is lunatic
I half suspected it.
Tic very true sir,
And such pranks he has plaid.
He's some great man,
The Duke commands me with such care to look to him,
And if he grow too violent, to correct him,
To use the speediest means for his recovery,
And those he must find sharpe.
The better for him:
How got ye him hither?
With a train, I told him:
He's in love with a boy, there lies his melancholy.
Hither he came to seek one.
Yes, J sent him,
Now had we dealt by force, we had never brought him.
Here was a boy.
He saw him not?
He was gon first.
It is the better; look you to your charge well:
Isle see him lodged, for so the duke commanded me
He will be very rough.
We are used to that sir,
And we as rough as he, if he give occasion.
You will find him gainful, but be sure ye curb him,
And get him if ye can fairly to his lodging, 
I am afraid ye will not.
We must sweat then.
What dost thou talk to me of noises? i'll have more noise
I'll have all loose, and all shall play their prizes;
Thy Master has let loose the boy I looked for
Basely conveyed him hence.
Will ye go out sir?
I will not out: I will have all out with' me, 
I'll have thy Master in; he's only mad here.
And rogues, isle have ye all whipped: heigh mad boys, mad boys.
Do you perceive him now?
Tic too apparent.
I am glad she is gon: he raves thus.
Do you hear sir,
Pray will ye make less stir, and see your chamber,
Call in more help; and make the closet ready.
I thought he was mad: isle have on• long lash at ye.
My chamber? where my chamber why my chamber
Wher's the young boy?
Nay pray ye sir be more modest
For your own credit sake: the people see ye,
And I would use ye with the best.
Best, hang ye
What dost thou think me mad?
Pray, and be civil,
Heaven may deliver ye.
Into a rogues hands.
You do but draw more misery upon ye,
And add to your disease.
Get from me.
No sir,
You must not be left so: bear your self civilly,
And twill be better for ye: swell not, nor chafe not.
I am a Gentleman, and a neighbour, rascal.
A great deal the more pity: I have heard of ye.
Excellent Master.
The Duke is very tender too.
Am I lunatic? am I run mad?
What dost thou talk to me of Dukes, and Devils,
Why do the people gape so?
Do not anger 'em,
But go in quietly, and slip in softly
They will so tew ye, else, I am commanded sir.
Why, prithee why?
Ye are dog-mad: you perceive it not
Very far mad: and whips will scant recover ye.
Ha▪ whips?
I whips, and sore whips, and ye were a Lord sir,
If ye be stubborn here:
Whips? what am I grown.
O I could burst: hold, hold, hold, hold o'both ends,
How h• looks, pray heaven, he be not mad indeed.
I do not perceive I am so; but if you think it,
Nor I▪le be hanged if it be so.
Do you see this sir? 
Down with that devil in ye.
Indeed I am angry,
But isle contain my self: O I could burst now,
And tear my self, but these rogues will torment me,
Mad in mine old days? make mine own afflictions?
What doe you mutter sir?
Nothing, sir, nothing;
I will go in, and quietly, most civilly:
And good sir, let none of your tormentors come about me,
You have a gentle face; they look like Dragons.
Be civil and be safe: come, for these two days
Ye must eat nothing neither: twill ease your fits sir.
Twill starve me sir; but I must bear it joyfully.
I may sleep?
Yes, a little: go in with these men.
O miserable me! 
Isle follow presently.
You see tic done sir.
Ye have done it handsomely,
And isle inform the Duke so: Pray ye attend him;
Let him want nothing, but his will.
He shall not,
And if he be rebellious—
Never spare him:
He has flesh, and hide enough, he loves a whipping.
My service to his Grace. 
I shall commend it.
So, thou art fast: I must go get some fresh room
To laugh, and caper in: O how it tickles me!
O how it tumbles me with joy! thy mouths stopped:
Now if I can doe my Mistress good, I am Sainted. 
Now, of my conscience, we have lost him utterly,
He's not gon home: we heard from thence this morning,
And since our parting last at Rodorigo's,
You know what ground we have travelled.
He's asleep sure:
For if he had been awake, we should have met with him:
Faith let's turn back, we have but a fruitless journey;
And to hope further of Alindas recovery,
(For sure she'll rather perish then return)
Is but to seek a Moth in the Sun.
We will on sure;
Something we will know, some cause of all this fooling,
Make some discovery.
Which way shall we cast then,
For all the Champion Country, and the villages,
And all those sides?
We will cross these woods a while then:
Here if we fail, we will gallop to Segonia
Add if we light of no news there, hear nothing;
We will even turn fairly home, and coast the other side.
He may be sick, or fallen into some danger;
He has no guide, nor no man to attend him.
He's well enough, he has a travelled body,
And though he be old, he's tough, and will endure well;
But he is so violent to find her out,
That his anger leads him a thousand wild goose chases:
Isle warrant he is well.
Shall we part company?
By no means, no: that were a sullen business:
No pleasure in our journey: Come, let's cross here first,
And where we find the paths, let them direct us. 
Why are you still so fearful of me, Lady?
So doubtful of my faith, and honest service?
To hide your self from me, to fly my company?
Am I not yours? all yours? by this light you shake still;
Do ye suspect me false? did I ever fail ye?
Doe you think I am corrupted? base? and treacherous?
Lord, how ye look! Is not my life tide to ye?
And all the power I have to serve, and honour ye?
Still do ye doubt? still am I terrible?
I will not trouble ye: good Heaven preserve ye,
And send ye what ye wish: I will not see ye,
Nor once remember I had such a Misiris.
I will not speak of ye, nor name Alinda,
For fear you should suspect I would betray ye:
Goodness and peace conduct ye.
Prithee pardon me,
I know thou art truly faithful: and thou art welcome,
A welcome partner to my miseries;
Thou know I love thee too.
I have thought so, Lady.
Alas, my fears have so distracted me
I durst not trust my self.
Come, pray ye think better,
And cast those by: at least consider, Lady,
How to prevent 'em: pray ye put off this fools coat;
Though it have kept ye secret for a season,
Tic known now, and will betray ye; your arch enemy
Roderigo is abroad: many are looking for ye.
I know it: and those many I have cozened:
You cannot still thus.
I have no means to shift it.
I have: and shift you too. I lay last night
At a poor widows house here in the Thicket,
Whether I will conduct ye, and new shape ye,
My self too to attend ye.
What means hast thou?
For mine are gone.
Fear not, enough to serve ye;
I came not out so empty.
Prithee tell me;
(For thou hast stroke a kind of comfort through me.)
When saw thou Roderigo?
Even this morning,
And in these woods: take heed, he has got a new shape.
The habit of a Pilgrim? yes, I know it,
And I hope shall prevent it; was he alone?
No Madam, and which made me wonder mightily,
He was in company with that handsome Pilgrim,
That sad sweet man.
That I forgot to give to?
The same, the very same, that you so pitied,
A man as fit to suit his villainies.
And did they walk together?
Wondrous civilly.
Talk, and discourse?
I think so, for I see 'em
Make many stands, and then embrace each other.
The Pilgrim is betrayed, a Judas dwells with him,
A Simon, that will seem a Saint to choke him.
Can thou but show me this?
Lord how she trembles!
Not thus, for all the world, ye are undone then;
But let's retire, and alter, then we will walk free;
And then isle show ye any things.
Come, good wench,
And speedily: for I have strange faiths working,
As strange fears too, isle tell thee all my life then.
Come quick, isle conduct ye, and still serve ye,
And doe not fear; hang fear, it spoils all projects.
This way; Isle be your guide. 
Use all your sports,
All your solemnities; tic the Kings day to morrow.
His birth day, and his marriage, a glad day,
A day we ought to honour, all.
We will sir,
And make Segonia ring with our rejoicings.
Be sumptuous, but not riotous; be bounteous,
But not in drunken Bacchanals: free to all strangers,
Easy, and sweet in all your entertainments,
For tic a Royal day admits no rudeness.
Your Lordship will do us the honour to be here your self,
And grace the day?
Tic a maine part of my service.
I hope your honour has taken into your consideration
The miseries we have suffered by these Out-laws,
The losses, hourly fears; the rude abuses
Strangers that travel to us are daily laden with
Our daughters, and our wives complaints.
I am sorry for it,
And have Commission from the King to ease it:
You shall not be long vexed.
Had we not walls, sir,
And those continually manned too with our watches,
We should not have a bit of meat to feed us.
And yet they are our friends, and we must think so,
And entertain 'em so sometimes, and feast 'em,
And send 'em laden home too, we are lost else.
They'll come to Church amongst us, as we hope Christians,
When all their zeal is but to steal the Chalices;
At this good time now, if your Lordship were not here,
To awe their violence with your authority,
They would play such gambols.
Are they grown so heady?
They would drink up all our Wine, peace out our Bonfires;
Then, like the drunken Centaurs, have at the fairest,
Nay, have at all: fourscore and ten's a Goddess,
Whilst we, like fools, stand shaking in our cellars.
Are they so fierce upon so little sufferance?
Isle give 'em such a purge, and suddenly.
Verdugo, after this solemnity is over
Call on me for a charge of men, of good men,
To see what house these knaves keep: of good soldiers,
As sturdy as themselves: that dare dispute with 'em,
Dare walk the woods as well as they, as fearless,
But with a better faith belabour 'em;
Isle know what claim they have to their possession.
Tic pity of their Captain Roderigo,
A wel-bred Gentleman, and a good soldier,
And one, his Majesty has some little reason
To thank, for sundry services, and fair ones;
That long neglect bred this, I am sorry for him.
The hope of his estate keeps back his pardon,
There's divers wasps, that buzz about that honey-box,
And long to lick themselves full.
True Verdugo,
Would he had but the patience to discern it,
And policy to wipe their lips.
To fetch him in sir,
By violence, he being now no infane,
Will ask some bloody crowns. I know his people.
Are of his own choice men, that will not totter,
Nor blench much at a Bullet; I know his order,
And though he have no multitude, he has manhood;
The elder-twin to that too, staid experience.
But if he must be forced, sir, —
There's no remedy,
Unless he come himself.
That will be doubtful.
Did you never hear yet of the Noble Pedro?
I cannot by no means; I think he's dead sure;
The Court bewails much his untimely loss:
The King himself laments him.
He was sunk;
And if he be dead, he died happily,
He buried all he had in the Kings service,
And lost himself.
Well: if he be alive, Captain,
(As hope still speaks the best) I know the Kings mind
So inwardly and full, he will be happy.
Come, to this preparation; when that's done,
The Outlaws expedition is begun.
We will contribute all to that, and help our selves too.
How sweet these solitary places are? how wantonly
The wind blows through the leafes, and courts, and plays with 'em?
Will ye sit down, and sleep? the heat invites ye.
Hark how yond purling stream dances, and murmurs,
The Birds sing softly too: pray take some rest, sir.
I would fine woo his fancy to a peace,
It labours high and hastily upon him;
Pray ye sit, and Isle sit by.
I cannot sleep friend,
I have those watches here admit no slumbers.
Saw ye none yet?
No creature.
What strange Music
Was that we heard afar off?
I cannot guess;
It was loud, and shrill: sometimes it showed hard by us,
And by and by the sound fled as the wind does;
Here's no inhabitants.
It much delighted me.
They talk of Fairies, and such demi-devils,
This is as fine a place to dance their gambols.—
Me thought I heard a voice. 
They can sing admirably,
They never lose their maiden-heads: I would fool any away
To make him merry now: methinks yond rocks yonder
Show like enchanted Cells, where they inhabit.
Tic here again, hark gentle Roderigo,
Hark, hark: O sweet, sweet, how the Birds record too!
Mark how it flies now every way. O love,
In such a harmony art thou begotten,
In such soft Ayre, so gentle, lul'd and nourished.
O my best Mistress!
How he weeps! dear Heaven
Give him his hearts content, and me forgive too.
I must melt too.
The Birds sing louder, sweeter,
And every note they emulate one another?
Lie still and hear: These when they have done their labours,
Their pretty airs, fall to their rests, enjoy 'em.
Nothing rocks Love asleeep, but death.
Who are these?
What.
Those there, those, those things that come upon us,
Those grandam things, those strange antiquities.
Did not I say these words begot strange wonders?
Now ye may view 'em.
Ha?
The men ye longed for,
Here they are both: now ye may boldly talk with 'em,
And never be guessed at: be not afraid, nor faint not;
They wont•r at us; let's maintain that wonder;
Shake not, but what ye purpose doe discreetly,
And from your tongue i'll take my part.
Ha?
There: before ye, there, doe not turn coward Mistress,
If ye doe love, carry your Love out handsomely.
It is he and Roderigo; what a peace
Dwells in their faces, what a friendly calm
Crowns both their souls?
They show as if they were mortal,
They come upon us still.
Be not afraid, man,
Let 'em be what they will, they cannot hurt us,
That thing in the Button'd-Cap looks terribly.
She has Guns in her eyes, the devils Engineer.
Come, stand, and let's go meet 'em.
Go you first.
I have less faith: when I have said my Prayers—
There needs no fear, hail reveren'd dames.
Good ev'en.
What doe ye seek?
We would seek happier fortunes.
That little devil has maine need of a Barber,
What a trim beard she has?
Seek 'em, and make 'em,
Lie not still, nor longer here,
Here inhabits nought but fear.
Be constant good, in faith be clear,
Fortune will waite ye every where.
Whether should we go? for we believe thy Reverence,
And next obey.
Go to Segonia.
And there before the Altar pay thy vows,
Thy gifts, and Prayers: unload thy heavines,
To morrow shed thy tears, and gain thy suit,
Such honest noble showers, ne'er wanted fruit.
Stand you out too.
I shall be hanged, or whipped now:
These know, and these have power.
See how he shakes.
A secure conscience never quakes,
Thou hast been ill; be so no more,
A good retreat is a great store.
Thou hast commanded men of might,
Command thy self, and then thou art right,
Command thy will: thy foul desires.
Put out and quench thy unhallowed fires:
Command thy mind, and make that pure;
Thou art wise then, valiant, and secure.
A blessing then thou moist beget.
A curse else that shall never set
Will light upon thee: Say thy Prayers,
Thou hast as many sins, as hairs.
Thou art a Captain, let thy men
Be honest, and good thoughts, and then
Thou moist command, and lead in chief,
Yet thou art bloody, and a theife.
What shall doe? I doe confess.
Retire,
And purge thee perfect in his fire:
His life observe; live in his School,
And then thou shalt put off the fool.
Pray at Segonia too, and give
Thy Offerings up, repent, and live.
Away, away: enquire no more, within Music
Doe this, ye are rich, else fools, not poor;
What Musick's this?
Retire? it is some neat Joy,
In honour of the Kings great day: they wonder,
This comes in right to confirm their reverence.
Away, away, let them admire, it makes
For our advantage: how the Captain shakes? 
This was the Music.
Yes, yes, how I sweat!
I was never so deserted; sure these woods
Are only inhabited with rare dreams, and wonders;
I would not be a knave again, a villain:
Lord, how I loath it now: for these know all Sir,
And they would find me out.
They are excellent women,
Deep in their knowledge, friend.
I would not be traitor,
And have these of my Jury; how light I am,
And how my heart laughs now me thinks within me?
Now I am Catechised, I would ever dwell here,
For there is a kind of Court of Reformation;
Had I been stubborn friend.
They would have found it.
And then they would have handled me a new way,
The devils dump had been danced then.
Let's away
And doe their great Commands, and do 'em handsomely:
Contrite, and true, for I believe Roderigo,
And constantly believe, we shall be happy.
So you doe well; fall edge or flat O my side;
All I can stagger at is the Kings Anger,
Which if it come, I am prepared to meet it.
The King has mercy, friend, as well as Justice:
And when you fall: no more.
I hope the fairest. 
We have told ye what he is: what time we have sought him:
His nature, and his name: the seeming Boy too,
Ye had here, how, and what by your own relation,
All circumstances we have cleared: That the Duke sent him
We told ye how impossible; he knows him not;
That he is mad himself, and therefore fit
To be your Prisoner, we dare swear against it.
Take heed Sir, be not madder then you would make him;
Though he be rash, and sudden (which is all his wildenes)
Take heed ye wrong him not: he is a Gentleman,
And so must be restored and cleared in all points;
The King shall be a Judge else.
It was some trick
That brought him hither: the Boy, and letter counterfeit,
Which shall appear, if ye dare now detain him.
I dare not Sir; nor will not: I believe ye,
And will restore him up: had I known sooner
H'ad been a neighbour, and the man you speak him,
(Though as I live, he carried a wild seeming)
My Service, and my self had both attended him
How I have used him, let him speak.
Let's in, and visit him:
Then to the holy Temple: there pay our duties,
And so we'll take our leaves.
I'll waite upon ye. 
This to devotion sacred be,
This to the Kings prosperity,
This to the Queen, and Chastity. 
These Oblations first we bring
To purge our selves: These to the King.
To love, and beauty these: now sing. 
Holy Altar, deign to take
These for our selves: For the Kings sake
And honour these: These sacred lye
To Virtue, Love, and Modesty
Our wishes to Eternity. 
For our selves first, thus we bend
Forgive us heaven, and be our friend:
And happy fortune to us send.
To the King, honour, and all Joy,
Long, and happy from annoy.
Prosperous be all his days
Every new hour, a new praise.
Every minute thus be seen,
And thousand honours Crown the Queen. 
Come to the Altar: let, us do our duties.
I have almost forgot a Church.
Kneel reverently.
For my lost wits (let me see)
First J pray: and secondly
To be at home again, and free,
And if I travel more, hang me,
For the King, and for the Queen,
That they may be wise, and seen
Never in the Mad-mans In.
For my daughter, I would pray
But she has made a holly-day,
And needs not my devotion now
Let her take her own course (heaven,)
Whether it be od, or even. 
And if that please not, take her you.
A short, and sweet Meditation: what are these here?
Hail to this sacred place,
They are all here, Madam:
No violence dare touch here; be secure:
My Bilbo Master too: how got he loose again?
How lamentably he looks: he has had discipline.
I dare not let him know my pranks.
It is she sure.
It is certainly.
Ha! doe I dazzle?
It is the fair Alinda.
What wonder stand these strangers in?
Her woman by her,
The same Sir, as I live,
I had a daughter,
With such a face once: such eyes and nose too,
Ha, let me see, it is wondrous like Alinda,
Their devotion ended, I'll mark 'em and nearer.
And she had a Filly that waited on her:
Just with such a favour,
Doe they keep Goats now?
Thus we kneel, and thus we pray
A happy honour, to this day,
Thus our Sacrifice we bring
Ever happy to the King.
These of Purple, Damask greene
Sacred, to the virtuous Queen
Here we hang.
As these are now
Her glories ever spring, and show,
These for our selves: our hopes, and loves,
Full of pincks, and Ladies gloves,
Of hartes-ease too, which we would fine
As we labour for, attain;
Hear me heaven, and as I bend,
Full of hope: some comfort send.
Hear her: hear her: if there be
A spotless Sweetness, this is she. 
Now Roderigo stand.
He that divides ye
Divides my life too.
Pedro, Noble Pedro.
Doe not you know your friend?
I know, and honour ye.
Lady this leave i'll crave, pray be not angry,
I will not long divide you: how happy Pedro,
Would all the Court be now, might they be hold thee?
Might they but see you thus and thus embrace you?
The King will be a joyful man believe it
Most joyful Pedro.
I am his humble Servant.
Nay, good Sir, speak your will, I see you wonder, one easy word from you—
I dare say nothing
My tongue's a new tongue Sir, and knows his tither,
Let her doe what she please, I dare doe nothing,
I have been damned for doing, will the King know him?
That fellow there, will he respect and honour him?
He has been looked upon they say: will he own him?
Yes certainly and grace him, ever honour him,
Restore him every way, he has much lamented him.
Is it your will too? this is the last time of asking.
I am sure, none else shall touch her, none else enjoy her.
If this, and this hold.
You had best begin the game then, I have no title in her,
Pray take her, and dispatch her, and commend me to her,
And let me get me home, and hope I am sober:
Kiss, kiss, it must be thus: stand up Alinda,
I am the more Child, and more need of blessing.
Ye had a waiting woman, one Iuletta,
A pretty desperate thing, just such another
As this sweet Lady; we called her nimble chaps.
I pray is this the party?
No indeed Sir,
She is at home; I am a little Foot-Boy,
That walk a nights, and fright old Gentlemen;
Make 'em loose Hats and Cloaks.
And Horses too.
Sometimes I doe Sir, teach 'em the way through ditches;
And how to break their worships skins, and notes
Against old broken Stiles, and Stumps.
A fine art.
I feel it in my bones yet.
I am a Drum Sir,
A Drum at mid-night, ran tan tan tan tan Sir,
Do you take me for Iuletta? I am a Page Sir,
That brought a letter from the Duke of Medina
To have one senior Alphonso, just such another
As your old worship wormed for running mad Sir.
Alas, you are mistaken,
Thou art the devil,
And so thou hast used me,
I am any thing,
An old woman, that tells fortunes.
Ha.
And frights good people,
And sends them to Segonia for their fortunes:
I am strange ayers, and excellent sweet voices.
I am any thing, to doe her good believe me;
She now recovered, and her wishes crowned
I am Iuletta again, pray sir forgive me.
I dare not doe otherwise, for fear thou should still follow me,
Prithee be forgiven, and I prithee forgive me too:
And if any of you, will marry her.
No I beseech you Sir;
My Mistress is my husband, with her I'll dwell still,
And when you play any more pranks you know where to have me.
You know him Sir.
Know him, and much lament him:
The Kings incensed much, much Sir, I can assure you.
Noble Governor.
But since he is your friend, and now appears,
In honour of this day and love to you sir:
I'll try the power I have, to the pinch i'll put it;
Here's my hand Roderigo, I'll set you fair again.
And here's mine, to be true, and full of Service.
Your people too, shall have their general pardons,
We'll have all peace and love.
All shall pray for you.
To my house now, and suite you to your words;
Off with these weeds, and appear glorious:
Then to the Priest, that shall attend us here,
And this be styled Loves new and happy year.
The Kings and Queens, two noble honours meet,
To grace this day, two true loves at their feet
Well well, since wedding will come after wooing,
Give me some Rose-Mary, and let's be going.

