OPen the Ports and see the watch relieved,
And let the guards be careful of their business
Their vigilant eyes fixed on these Islanders,
They are false and desperate people, when they find
The least occasion open to encouragement,
Cruel, and crafty souls, believe me Gentlemen,
Their late attempt, which is too fresh amongst us,
In which against all arms, and honesty,
The Governor of Ternata made surprise.
Of our confederate, the King of Tidore,
As for his recreation he was rowing
Between both Lands, bids us be wise and circumspect.
It was a mischief suddenly imagined;
And as soon done; that Governor's a fierce knave,
Unfaithful as he is fierce too, there's no trusting;
But I wonder much how such poor and base pleasures,
As tugging at an oar, or skill in steerage,
Should become Princes.
Base breeding love base pleasure;
They take as much delight in a Baratto,
A little scurvy boat to row her tithly,
And have the art to turn and wind her nimbly,
Think it as noble too, though it be slavish,
And a dull labour that declines a Gentleman:
As we Portuguese, or the Spaniards do in riding,
In managing a great horse which is princely:
The French in Courtship, or the dancing English,
In carrying a fair presence.
He was strangely taken;
But where no faith is, there's no trust; he has paid for it
His sister yet the fair and great Quisara,
Has showed a noble mind, and much love in it
To her afflicted brother, and the nobler still it appears,
And seasons of more tenderness, because his ruin stiles her absolute
And his imprisonment adds to her profit.
Feeling all this, which makes all men admire her.
The warm beams of this fortune that fall on her,
Yet has she made diverse and noble treaties,
And propositions for her brothers freedom,
If wealth or honour—
Peace, peace, you are fooled sir;
Things of these natures have strange outsides Pedro,
And cunning shadows, set 'em far from us,
Draw 'em but near, they are gross, and they abuse us;
They that observe her close, shall find her nature,
Which I doubt mainly will not prove so excellent;
She is a Princess, and she must be fair,
That's the prerogative of being royal:
Let her want eyes and nose, she must be beauteous,
And she must know it too, and the use of it,
And people must believe it, they are damned else:
Why, all the neighbour Princes, are mad for her,
Is she not fair then?
But her hopes are fairer,
And there's a haughty Master, the King of Bakan,
That lofty sir, that speaks far more, and louder
In his own commendations then a Cannon:
He is stricken dumb with her.
Beshrew me she is a sweet one.
And there's that hopeful man of Syana,
That sprightly fellow, he that's wise and temperate,
He is a lover too.
Would I were worth her looking
For; by my life I hold her a complete one,
The very Sun I think, affects her sweetness,
And dares not as he does to all else, dye it
Into his tawny Livery.
She dares not see him,
But keeps her self at distance from his kisses,
And wears her complexion in a case; let him but like it
A week or two, or three, she would look like a Lion;
But the maine sport on it is, or rather wonder
The Governor of Ternata her mortal enemy,
He that has caught her brother King is struck too,
And is arrived under safe conduct also,
And hostages of worth delivered for him;
And he brought a letter from his prisoner,
Whether compelled, or willingly delivered
From the poor King, or what else dare be in it.
So it be honourable, any thing, it is all one,
For I dare think she'll do the best.
It is certain
He has admittance, and solicits hourly.
Now if he have the trick—
What trick?
The true one,
To take her too, if he be but skil'd in bat-fowling,
And lime his bush right.
I'll be hanged when that hits,
For it is not a compelled, or forced affection,
That must take her, I guess her stout and virtuous,
But whore's your uncle sir, our valiant Captain,
The brave Ruy Dias all this while?
I marry,
He is amongst 'em too.
A Lover.
Nay,
I know not that, but sure he stands in favour,
Or would stand stiffly, he is no Portugal else.
The voice says in good favour, in the list too
Of the privy wooers, how cunningly of late
I have observed him, and how privately
He has stolen at all hours from us, and how readily
He has feigned a business to bid the Fort farewell
For five or six days, or a month together,
Sure there is something—
Yes, yes, there is a thing in it,
A thing would make the best on's all dance after it;
A dainty thing; Lord how this uncle of mine
Has read to me, and rated me for winching,
And told me in what desperate case it would leave me,
And how it would stew my bones.
You cared not for it.
I faith, not much, I ventured on still easily,
And took my chance, danger is a Soldiers honour;
But that this man, this herb of Grace, Ruy Dias,
This father of our faculties should slip thus,
For sure he is a ferreting, that he
That would drink nothing to depress the spirit,
But milk and water, eat nothing but thin ayre
To make his blood obedient, that his youth
In spite of all his temperance, should tickle,
And have a love mange on him.
It is in him sir
But honourable courtship, and becomes his rank too.
In me it were abominable Lechery, or would be,
For when our thoughts are on it, and miss their level,
We must hit something.
Well, 'is a noble Gentleman,
And if he be a suitor, may he speed in it.
Let him alone, our family ne'er failed yet.
Our mad Lieutenant still merry Pyniero,
Thus would he do if the Surgeon were searching of him.
Especially if a warm wench had shot him.
But hark Christophero; come hither Pedro;
When saw you our brave countryman Armusia?
He that's arrived here lately, and his gallants?
A goodly fellow, and a brave companion
Me thinks he is, and no doubt truly valiant,
For he that dares come hither, dares fight any where.
I saw him not of late, a sober Gentleman
I am sure he is, and no doubt bravely sprung,
And promises much nobleness.
I love him,
And by my troth would fine be inward with him;
Pray lets go seek him.
We'll attend you sir.
By that time we shalheare the burst of business. 
Aunt I much thank you for your courtesy,
And the fair liberty you still allow me,
Both of your house and service, though I be
A Princess, and by that Prerogative stand free
From the poor malice of opinion,
And no ways bound to render up my actions,
Because no power above me can examine me;
Yet my dear brother being still a prisoner,
And many wandering eyes upon my ways,
Being left alone a Sea-marke, it behoves me
To use a little caution, and be circumspect.
You're wise and noble Lady.
Often Aunt
I resort hither, and privately to see you,
It may be to converse with some I favour;
I would not have it known as oft, nor construed,
It stands not with my care.
You speak most fairly,
For even our pure devotions are examined.
So mad are men's minds now.
Or rather monstrous;
They are thick dreams, bread in fogs that know no fairness.
Madam the house is yours, I am yours, pray use me,
And at your service all I have lies prostrate;
My care shall ever be to yield ye honour,
And when your fame false here, it is my fault Lady;
A poor and simple banquet I have provided,
Which if you please to honour with your presence —
I thank ye Aunt, I shall be with you instantly,
A few words with this Gntleman.
I'll leave ye, 
And when you please retire, I'll wait upon you.
Why, how now Captain, what afraid to speak to me?
A man of arms, and daunted with a Lady?
Commanders have the power to parley with Princes.
Madam, the favours you have still showered on me,
Which are so high above my means of merit,
So infinite, that nought can value 'em
But their own goodness, no eyes look up to 'em
But those that are of equal light; and lustre,
Strike me thus mute, you are my royal Mistress,
And all my services that aim at honour,
Take life from you, the Saint of my devotions;
Pardon my wish, it is a fair ambition,
And well becomes the man that honours you;
I would I were of worth, of something near you,
Of such a royal piece, a King I would be,
A mighty King that might command affection,
And bring a youth upon me might be witch ye,
And you a sweet sold Christian.
Now you talk sir;
You Portuguese, though you be rugged Soldiers,
Yet when you list to flatter, you are plain courtiers;
And could you wish me Christian brave Ruy Dias?
At all the danger of my life great Lady,
At all my hopes, at all—
Pray ye stay a little,
To what end runs your wish?
O glorious Lady,
That I might — but I dare not speak.
I dare then,
That you might hope to marry me; nay blush not,
An honourable end needs no excuse;
And would you love me then?
My soul not dearer.
Do some brave thing that may entice me that way,
Some thing of such a meritorious goodness,
Of such an unmatched nobleness, that I may know
You have a power beyond ours that preserves you,
It is not the person, nor the royal title,
Nor wealth, nor glory that I look upon,
That inward man I love that's lined with virtue,
That well deserving soul works out a favour;
I have many Princes suitors, many great ones,
Yet above these I love you, you are valiant,
An active man, able to build a fortune;
I do not say I dote, nor mean to marry,
Only the hope is something may be done,
That may compel my faith, and ask my freedom,
And leave opinion fair.
Command dear Lady,
And let the danger be as deep as hell,
As direful to attempt —
You're too sudden,
I must be ruled by you, find out a fortune
Wisely and handsomely, examine time,
And court occasion that she may be ready;
A thousand uses for your forward spirit
Ye may find daily, be sure ye take a good one,
A brave and worthy one that may advance ye,
Forced smiles reward poor dangers; you are a Soldier,
I would not talk so else, and I love a Soldier,
And that that speaks him true, and great, his valour;
Yet for all these which are but women's follies,
You may do what you please, I shall still know ye,
And though ye wear no sword.
Excellent Lady,
When I grow so cold, and disgrace my nation,
That from their hardy nurses suck adventures,
It were fit I wore a Tombstone; you have read to me
The story of your favour, if I mistake it,
Or grow a tenant in the study of it,
A great correction Lady—
Let's to the banquet,
And have some merrier talk, and then to Court,
Where I give audience to my general Suitors;
Pray heaven my women's wit hold; there brave Captain,
You may perchance meet something that may startle ye;
I'll say no more, come be not sad—
I love ye. 
You are welcome gentlemen, most worthy welcome,
And know there's nothing in our power may serve ye,
But you may freely challenge.
Sir we thank ye,
And rest your servants too.
Ye are worthy Portuguese,
You show the bravery of your minds and spirits;
The nature of our country too, that brings forth
Stirring, unwearied souls to seek adventures;
Minds never satisfied with search of honour
Where time is, &amp; the sun gives light, brave countrymen,
Our names are known, new worlds disclose their riches,
Their beauties, and their prides to our embraces;
And we the first of nations find these wonders.
These noble thoughts sir, have enticed us forward,
And minds unapt for ease to see these miracles,
In which we find report a poor relater;
We are arrived among the blessed I stands,
Where every wind that rises blows perfumes;
And every breath of air is like an Incense:
The treasure of the Sun dwells here, each tree
As if it envied the old Paradise,
Strives to bring forth immortal fruit; the spices
Renewing nature, though not deifying,
And when that false by time, scorning the earth,
The sullen earth should taint or suck their beauties,
But as we dreamt, for ever so preserve us:
Nothing we see, but breeds an admiration;
The very rivers as we float along,
Throw up their pearls, and curl their heads to court us;
The bowels of the earth swell with the births
Of thousand unknown gems, and thousand riches;
Nothing that bears a life, but beings a treasure;
The people they show brave too, civil mannered,
Proportioned like the Masters of great minds,
The women which I wonder at—
Ye speak well.
Of delicate aspects, fair, clearly beauteous,
And to that admiration, sweet and courteous.
And is not that a good thing? brave Armusia
You never saw the Court before?
No certain,
But that I see a wonder too, all excellent,
The Government exact.
Ye shall see anon,
That that will make ye start indeed, such beauties,
Such riches, and such form.
We are fire already;
The wealthy Magazine of nature sure
Inhabits here.
These sure are all Ilanders.
Yes, and great Princes too, and lusty lovers.
They are goodly persons; what might he be signeor
That bears so proud a state?
King of Bakam,
A fellow that farts terror,
He looks highly,
Sure he was begot of the top of a steeple.
It may well be,
For you shall hear him ring anon.
That is Syana,
And a brave tempered fellow, and more valiant.
What rugged face is that?
That's the great Governor,
The man surprised our friend, I told ye of him.
'Has dangerous eyes.
A perilous thief, and subtle.
And to that subtlety a heart of Iron.
Yet the young Lady makes it melt.
They start all,
And thunder in the eyes.
Away ye poor ones,
Am I in competition with such bubbles?
My virtue, and my name ranked with such trifles?
Ye speak loud.
Young-man, I will speak louder;
Can any man but I, deserve her favour,
You petty Princes? 
He will put 'em all in's pocket.
Thou proud mad thing be not so full of glory,
So full of vanity.
How: I contemn thee,
And that fort-keeping fellow,
How the dog looks,
The bandog Governor?
Ha, why?
Away thing,
And keep your rank with those that fit your toyalty;
Call out the Princess.
Dost thou know me bladder,
Thou insolent impostume?
I despise thee;
Art thou acquainted with my nature baby?
Let my revenge for injuries? dare thou hold me
So far behind thy file, I cannot reach thee?
What can thou merit?
Merit? I am above it;
I am equal with all honours, all achievements,
And what is great and worthy; the best doer
I keep at my command, fortune's my servant,
It is in my power now to despise such wretches,
To look upon ye slightly, and neglect ye,
And but she deigns at some hours to remember ye,
And people have bestowed some titles one ye,
I should forget your names—
Mercy of me;
What a blown fool has self affection
Made of this fellow? did not the Queen your mother,
Long for bellows, and bagpipes when she was great with ye,
She brought forth such a windy birth?
It is ten to one
She eat a Drum, and was delivered of alarm,
Or else he was swaddled in an old sail when he was young.
He swells too mainly with his meditations;
Faith talk a little hansomer, ride softly
That we may be able to hold way with ye, we are Princes,
But those are but poor things to you; talk wiser,
Twill well become your mightiness; talk less,
That men may think ye can do more.
Talk truth,
That men may think ye are honest, and believe ye,
Or talk your self asleep, for I am weary of you.
Why? I can talk and do.
That would do excellent.
And tell you, only I deserve the Princess,
And make good only I, if you dare, you sir,
Or your Syanas Prince.
Here is a storm toward,
Me thinks it sings already, to him Governor.
Here lies my proof. 
And mine.
I'll be short with ye,
For these long arguments I was never good at.
How white the boaster looks?
I see he lacks faith.
For shame forbear great Princes, rule your angers,
You violate the freedom of this place,
The state and royalty—
He's well contented
It seems, and so I have done.
Is this she signior?
This is the Princess sir.
She is sweet and goodly,
An admirable form, they have cause to justly.
Quisar. Ye wrong me and my court, ye forward Princes;
Comes your love wrapped in violence to seek us?
Is it fit though you be great, my pretence should be
Stained, and polluted with your bloody rages?
My privacies affrighted with your swords?
He that loves me, loves my command; be tempered,
Or be no more what ye profess, my Servants.
We are calm as peace.
What command she carries?
And what a sparkling Majesty flies from her?
Is it ye love to do? ye shall find danger,
And danger that shall start your resolutions,
But not this way; it is not contention,
Who loves me to my face best, or who can flatter most
Can carry me, he that deserves my favour,
And will enjoy what I bring, love and Majesty,
Must win me with his worth; must travel for me;
Must put his hasty rage off, and put on
A well confirmed, temperate, and true valour.
But show the way.
And will, and then show you
A will to tread the way, I'll say ye are worthy.
What task now
Will she turn 'em to? these hot youths,
I fear will find a cooling card, I read in her eyes
Something that has some swinge must fly amongst 'em;
By this hand I love her a little now.
It is not unknown to you
I had a royal brother, now miserable,
And Prisoner to that man; if I were ambitious,
Gaped for that glory was ne'er borne with me,
There they should lye as miseries upon him:
If I were covetous, and my heart set
On riches, and those base effects that follow
On pleasures uncontrolled, or safe revenges,
There he should dye, his death would give me all these;
For then stood I up absolute to do all;
Yet all these flattering shows of dignity,
These golden dreams of greatness cannot force
To forget nature and my fair affection.
Therefore that man that would be known my lover,
Must be known his redeemer, and must bring him
Either alive or dead to my embraces,
For even his bones I scorn shall feel such slavery,
Or seek another Mistress, twill be hard
To do this, wondrous hard, a great adventure,
Fit for a spirit of an equal greatness;
But being done, the reward is worthy of it.
How they stand gaping all?
Ruy Dias cold?
Not fly like fire into it? may be you doubt me,
He that shall do this is my husband Prince;
By the bright heavens he is, by whose justice
I openly proclaim it; if I lye,
Or seek to set you on with subtlety,
Let that meet with me, and reward my falsehood.
No stirring yet, no start into a bravery?
Madam, it may be, but being a maine danger,
Your Grace must give me leave to look about me,
And take a little time, the cause will ask it,
Great acts require great counsels.
Take your pleasure,
I fear the Portugal.
I'll raise an Army
That shall bring back his Island fort and all,
And fix it here.
How long will this be doing?
You should have begun in your Grandfathers days.
What may be,
And what my power can promise noblest Lady,
My will I am sure standsfaire.
Fair be your fortune,
Few promises are best, and fair performance.
These cannot doe,
Their power and arts are weak ones.
It is in my will, I have this King your brother,
He is my prisoner, I accept your prisoner,
And bless the fair occasion that achieved him:
I love ye, and I honour ye, but speak
Whether alive or dead he shall be rendered,
And see how readily, how in an instant,
Quick as your wishes Lady—
No, I scorn ye,
You and your curtsy; I hate your love sir;
And ere I would so basely win his liberty,
I would study to forget he was my brother;
By force he was taken; he that shall enjoy me,
Shall fetch him back by force, or never know me.
As I live, a rare wench.
She has a noble spirit.
By force?
Yes sir by force, and make you glad too
To let him go.
How? you may look nobler on me,
And think me no such boy; by force he must not,
For your love much may be.
Put up your passion,
And pack ye home, I say, by force, and suddenly.
He lies there till he rots else, although I love him
Most tenderly and dearly, as a brother,
And out of there respects would joy to see him;
Yet to receive him as thy courtly,
With all the honour thou could add unto him
From his hands that most hate him, I had rather
Though no condition were propounded for him,
See him far sunk in the earth, and there forget him.
Your hopes are gilt good Governor.
A rare woman.
Lady,
I'll pull this pride, I'll quench this bravery,
And turn your glorious scorn to tears and howlings;
I will proud Princess; this neglect of me
Shall make thy brother King most miserable;
Shall turn him into curses against thy cruelty:
For where before I used him like a King,
And did those Royal Offices unto him,
Now he shall lie a sad lump in a dungeon,
Laden with chains and fetters, colds and hunger,
Darkness and lingering death for his companions;
And let me see who dare attempt his rescue,
What desperate fool; look toward it; farewell,
And when thou know him thus, lament thy follies,
Nay I will make thee kneel to take my offer:
Once more farewell, and put thy trust in puppets. 
If none dare undertake it, I'll live a mourner.
You cannot want.
You must not.
It is most dangerous,
And wise men would proceed with care &amp; counsel,
Yet some way would I knnw—
Walk with me Gentlemen— 
How doe you like her spirit?
It is a clear one,
Clod with no dirty stuff, she is all pure honour.
The bravest wench I ever looked upon,
And of the strongest parts, she is most fair,
Yet her mind such a mirror—
What an action
Would this be to put forward one, what a glory,
And what an everlasting wealth to end it?
Methinkes my soul is strangely raised.
To step into it,
Just while they think, and ere they have determined
To bring the King off.
Things have been done as dangerous.
And prospered best when they were least considerd.
Bless me my hopes,
And you my friends assist me.
None but our companions.
You deal wisely,
And if we shrink the name of slaves dye with us.
Stay not for second thoughts.
I am determined;
And though I lose, it shall be sung, I was valiant,
And my brave offer shall be turned to story,
Worthy the Princess tongue. A boat that's all
That's unprovided, and habits like to merchants,
The rest we'll council as we go.
Away then,
Fortune looks fair on those, make haste to win her.
I Have kept many a man, and many a great one,
Yet I confess, I ne'er saw before
A man of such a sufferance; he lies now
Where I would not lay my dog, for sure it would kill him.
Where neither light or comfort can come near him;
Nor air, nor earth that's wholesome; it grieves me
To see a mighty King with all his glory,
Sunk of the sudden to the bottom of a dungeon.
Whether should we descend that are poor Rascals
If we had our deserts?
It is a strange wonder,
Load him with Irons, oppress him with contempts,
Which are the Governors commands, give him nothing,
Or so little, to sustain life, it is next nothing;
They stir not him, he smiles upon his miseries,
And bears 'em with such strength as if his nature
Had been nursed up, and fostered with calamities.
He gives no ill words, curses, nor ripens not,
Blames nothing, hopes in nothing we can hear of;
And in the midst of all these frights, fears nothing.
I'll be sworn
He fears not, for even when I shake for him,
As many times my pity will compel me,
When other souls that bear nor half his burden,
Shrink in their powers, and burst with their oppressions;
Then will he sing, woo his afflictions,
And court 'em in sad aires, as if he would wed 'em.
That's more then we have heard yet, we are only
Appointed for his guard, but not so near him,
If we could hear that wonder—
Many times
I fear the Governor should come to know it;
For his voice so affects me, so delights me,
That when I find his hour, I have Music ready,
And it stirs me infinitely, be but still and private,
And you may chance to hear.
King appears laden with chain, his head, arms only above
We will not stir sir;
This is a sudden change, but who darres blame it.
Now hark and melt, for I am sure I shall;
Stand silent, what stubborn weight of chains—
Yet he looks temperately.
His eyes not sunk, and his complexion firm still,
No wildness, no distempered touch upon him.
How constantly he smiles, and how undaunted?
With what a Majesty he heaves his head up? 
Now mark, I know he will sing; do not disturb him.
Your allowance from the Governor, would it were more sir,
Or in my power to make it hansomer.
Do not transgress thy charge, I take his bounty,
And fortune, whilst I bear a mind contented,
Not leavend with the glory I am fallen from,
Nor hang upon vain hopes, that may corrupt me.
Thou art my slave, and I appear above thee.
The Governor himself.
What, at your banquet?
And in such state, and with such change of service?
Nature's no glutton sir, a little serves her.
This diet's wholesome then.
I beg no better.
A calm contented mind, give him less next;
These full meals will oppress his health, his Grace
Is of a tender, and pure constitution,
And such repletions—
Mock, mock, it moves not me sir,
Thy mirthes, as do thy mischiefs fly behind me.
Ye carry it handsomely, but tell me patience,
Do not you curse the brave and royal Lady
Your gracious sister? do not you damn her pity,
Damn twenty times a day, and dam it seriously?
Do not you swear aloud too, cry and kick?
The very soul sweat in thee with the agony
Of her contempt of me? could not thou eat her
For being so injurious to thy fortune,
Thy fair and happy fortune? could not thou wish her
A Bastard, or a whore, fame might proclaim her
Black ugly fame, or that thou had had no sister?
Spitting the general name out, and the nature;
Blaspheming heaven for making such a mischief;
For giving power to pride, and will to woman?
No Tyrant, no, I bless and love her for it;
And though her scorn of thee, had laid up for me
As many plagues as the corrupted air breeds,
As many mischiefs as the hours have minutes.
As many forms of death, as doubt can figure;
Yet I should love her more still, and more honour her;
All thou can lay upon me, cannot bend me,
No not the stroke of death, that I despise too:
For if fear could possess me, thou had won me;
As little from this hour I prize thy flatteries,
And less then those thy prayers, though thou would kneel to me;
And if she be not Mistress of this nature,
She is none of mine, no kin, and I contemn her.
Are you so valiant sir?
Yes, and so fortunate;
For he that holds my constancy still conquers;
Had thou preserved me as a noble enemy,
And as at first, made my restraint seem to me
But only as the shadow of captivity,
I had still spoke thee noble, still declared thee
A valiant, great, and worthy man, still loved thee,
And still preferred thy fair love to my sister;
But to compel this from me with a misery,
A most inhumane, and unhansome slavery —
You will relent for all this talk I fear not,
And put your wits a work again.
You are cozened;
Or if I were so weak to be wrought to it,
So fearful to give way to so much poverty,
How I should curse her heart if she consented.
You shall write and entreat or —
Do thy utmost,
And even in all thy tortures I'll laugh at thee,
I'll think thee no more valiant, but a villain;
Nothing thou hast done brave, but like a thief,
Achieved by craft, and kept by cruelty;
Nothing thou can deserve, thou art unhonest;
Nor no way live to build a name, thou art barbarous.
Down with him low enough, there let him murmur,
And see his diet be so light and little,
He grow not thus high hearted on it, I will cool ye,
And make ye cry for mercy, and be ready
To work my ends, and willingly; and your sister taken down,
Your scornful, cruel sister shall repent too,
And sue to me for grace.
Give him no liberty,
But let his bands be doubled, his ease lessened;
Nothing his heart desires, but vex and torture him:
Let him not sleep, nothing that's dear to nature
Let him enjoy; yet take heed that he dye not;
Keep him as near death, and as willing to embrace it,
But see he arrive not at it; I will humble him,
And her stout heart that stands on such defiance;
And let me see her champions that dare venture
Her high and mighty wooers, keep your guards close,
And as yon love your lives be diligent,
And what I charge, observe.
We shall be dutiful. 
I'll pull your courage King and all your bravery.
Most certain he is resolved nothing can stir him;
For if he had but any part about him
Gave way to fear or hope, he durst not talk thus,
And do thus stoutly too, as willingly,
And quietly he sunk down to his sorrows,
As some men to their sleeps.
Yes, and sleeps with 'em;
So little he regards them, ther's the wonder,
And often soundly sleeps, would I durst pity him,
Or would it were in my will, but we are servants,
And tied unto command.
I wish him better,
But much I fear has found his tomb already,
We must observe our guards.
He cannot last long,
And when he is dead, he is free.
That's the most cruelty,
That we must keep him living.
That's as he please;
For that man that resolves, needs no Physician. 
Our prosperous passage was an omen to us,
A lucky and a fair omen.
We believe it.
The sea and wind strove who should most befriend us,
And as they favoured our design and loved us,
So lead us forth—where lies the boat that brought us?
Safe lodged within the Reeds, close by the Castle,
That no eye can suspect, nor thought come near it.
But where have you been, brave sir?
I have broke the Ice boys:
I have begun the game, fair fortune guide it,
Suspectlesse have I travelled all the town through,
And in this Merchants shape won much acquaintance,
Surveyed each strength and place that may befriend us,
Viewed all his Magazines, got perfect knowledge
Of where the prison is, and what power guards it.
These will be strong attempts.
Courage is strong:
What we began with policy, my dear friends,
Let's end with manly force; there's no retiring,
Unless it be with shame.
Shame his that hopes it
Better a few, and clearer fame will follow us,
However, lose or win, and speak our memories,
Then if we led our Armies; things done thus,
And of this noble weight, will stile us worthyes.
Direct, and we have done, bring us to execute,
And if we flinch, or fail—
I am sure ye dare not.
Then further know, and let no ear be near us
That may be false.
Speak boldly on, we are honest;
Our lives and fortunes yours.
Hard by the place then
Where all his treasure lies, his arms, his women,
Close by the prison too where he keeps the King,
I have hired a lodging, as a trading merchant,
A Cellar to that too, to stow my wares in,
The very wall of which, joins to his store-house.
What of all this?
Ye are dull, if ye apprehend not:
Into that Cellar, elected friends, I have conveyed
And unsuspected too that will doe it;
That that will make all shake, and smoke too.
Ha?
My thoughts have not been idle, nor my practice:
The fire I brought here with me shall doe something,
Shall burst into material flames, and bright ones,
That all the Island shall stand wondering at it,
As if they had been stricken with a Comet:
Powder is ready, and enough to work it,
The match is left afire, all, all hushed, and locked close,
No man suspecting what I am but Merchant:
An hour hence, my brave friends, look for the fury,
The fire to light us to our honoured purpose,
For by that time twill take.
What are our duties?
When all are full of fear and fright, the Governor
Out of his wits, the to see flames so imperious,
Ready to turn to ashes all he worships,
And all the people there to stop these ruins,
No man regarding any private office;
Then fly we to the prison suddenly,
Here's one has found the way, and dares direct us.
Then to our swords and good hearts,
I long for it.
Certain we shall not find much opposition,
But what is must be forced.
It is bravely cast sir,
And surely too I hope.
If the fire fail not,
And powder hold his nature, some must presently
Upon the first cry of the amazed people,
(For nothing will be marked then, but the misery)
Be ready with the boat upon an instant,
And then ell's right and fair.
Bless us dear fortune.
Let us be worthy of it in our courage,
And fortune must befriend us, come all sever,
But keep still within fight, when the flame rises
Let's meet, and either doe, or dye.
So be it. 
No Captain, for those troops we need 'em not,
The Town is strong enough to stand their furies;
I would see 'em come, and offer to doe something.
They are high in words.
It is safer sir then doing.
Dost think they dare attempt.
May be by treaty
But sure by force they will not prove so forward.
No faith, I warrant thee, they know me well enough,
And know they have no child in hand to play with:
They know my nature too, I have bit some of 'em,
And to the bones, they have reason to remember me,
It makes me laugh to think how glorious
The fools are in their promises, and how pregnant
Their wits and powers are to bring things to pass;
Am I not grown lean with loss of sleep and care
To prevent these threatenings, Captain?
You look well sir:
Upon my conscience you are not like to sicken
Upon any such conceit.
I hope I shall not:
Well would I had this wench, for I must have her,
She must be mine; and there's another charge Captain;
What betwixt love and brawling I got nothing,
All goes in maintenance—
Hark what was that, 
That noise there? it went with a violence.
Some old wall belike sir,
That had no neighbour help to hold it up,
Is fallen suddenly.
I must discard these Rascals,
That are not able to maintain their buildings,
They blur the beauty of the Town.
Fire, fire.
I hear another tune, good Captain,
It comes on fresher still, tic loud and fearful,
Look up into the Town, how bright the ayre shows;
Upon my life some sudden fire. 
The bell too? 
I hear the noise more clear
Fire, fire.
Where? where?
Suddenly taken in a Merchans house sir,
Fearful and high it blazes; help good people.
Pox o'their paper-houses, how they smother,
They light like candles, how the roar still rises?
Your Magazine's a fire sir, help, help suddenly,
The Castle too is in danger, in much danger,
All will be lost, get the people presently,
And all that are your guard, and all help, all hands sir,
Your wealth, your strand, is burnt else, the town perished;
The Castle now begins to flame.
My soul shakes.
A Merchants house next joining? shame light on him,
That ever such a neighbour, such a villain—
Raise all the garrison, and bring 'em up.
And beat the people forward—Oh I have lost all
In one house, all my hopes: good worthy Citizens
Follow me all, and all your powers give to me,
I will reward you all. Oh cursed fortune—
The flame's more violent: arise still, help, help Citizens,
Freedom &amp; wealth to him that helps: follow, oh follow.
Fling wine, or any thing, Isle see it recompensed.
Buckets, more Buckets; fire, fire, fire. 
Let it flame on, a comely light it gives up
To our discovery.
Hark, what a merry cry
These hounds make? forward fairly,
We are not seen in the mist, we are Not noted. Away,
Away. Now if we lose our fortune — 
Up soldiers, up, and deal like men.
More water, more water, all is consumed else.
Ell's gone, unless you undertake it straight, your
Wealth too, that must preserve, &amp; pay your labour bravely.
Up, up, away. 
So, thou art open, keep the way clear
Behind still. Now for the place.
It is here sir.
Sure this is it.
Force op the door—A miserable creature!
Yet by his manly face — The King discovered.
Why stare ye on me?
You cannot put on faces to affright me:
In death I am a King still, and contemn ye:
Where is that Governor? me thinks his man-hood
Should be well pleased to see my Tragedy,
And come to bath his sterne eyes in my sorrows;
I dare him to the fight, bring his scorns with him,
And all his rugged threats: here's a throat, soldiers;
Come, see who can strike deepest.
Break the Chain there.
What does this mean?
Come, talk of no more Governors,
He has other business sir, put your legs forward,
And gather up your courage like a man,
We'll carry off your head else: we are friends,
And come to give your sorrows ease.
On bravely;
Delays may lose again,
The Guard.
Upon 'em.
Make speedy, and sure work.
They fly.
Up with him, and to the Boat; stand fast, now be speedy,
When this heat's past, we'll sing our History.
Away, like thoughts, sudden as desires, friends;
Now sacred chance be ours.
Pray when we have done sir.
What is the fire allied?
It is out, tic out,
Or past the worst, I never did so stoutly
I'll assure you neighbours since I was a man:
I have been burnt at both ends like a squib:
I lived two hovres in the fire, it was a hideous matter;
But when men of understanding come about it,
Men that judge of things, my wife gave me over,
And took her leave a hundred times, I bore up still,
And tossed the Buckets boys.
We are all mere Martins.
I heard a voice at latter end of the hurry,
Or else I dreamt I heard it, that said treason.
It is like enough, it might cry murder to, for there was
Many without a joint, but whats that to us: Lets home
And fright our wives. for we look like Devils.
Here come some of 'em to fright us.
Mine's alive neighbor— oh sweet honey husband.
Thou least I think abominably, and thou had bin
In my place, thou would have stunk at both ends.
Get me some drink, give me whole tuns of drink,
Whole cisterns, for I have four dozen of fine firebrands
In my belly, I have more smoke in my mouth, then would
Blote a hundred herrings.
Art thou come safe again?
I pray you what became of my man, is he in a well?
At hearts ease in a Well, is very well neighbour;
We left him drinking of a new dozen of Buckets;
Thy husbands happy, he was through roasted,
And now hoe's basting of himself at all points:
The Clarke and he are cooling their pericraniums;
Body O me neighbours there's fire in my codpiece.
Bless my husband.
Blow it out wife—blow, blow, the gable end a'th' store-house.
Some water, water, water.
Peace, tic but a sparkle;
Raise not the Town again, twill be a great hinderance,
I'm glad tic out, and 't had tan in my hayloft?
What frights are these, marry heaven bless thy modicum.
But is a drowned outright, pray put me out of Fear neighbor.
Thou would have it so, but after a hundred fires
More, he will live to see thee burnt for brewing musty Liquor.
Come lets go neighbor.
For I would very fine turn down this liquor;
Come, come, I fry like a burnt marry-bone:
Women get you before, and draw upon us;
Run wenches run, and let your taps run with ye;
Run as the fire were in your tails, cry ale, ale.
Away lets nourish the poor wretches.
We'll Rally up the rest of the burnt Regiment.
The fire's quenched Captain, but the mischief hangs still;
The Kings redeemed, &amp; gon too; a trick, a damned one:
Oh I am overtaken poorly, tamely.
Where were the guard that waited upon the prison?
Most of 'em slain, yet some escaped sir, and they deliver,
They saw a little boat ready to receive him,
And those redeemed him, making such haste and fighting;
Fighting beyond the force of men.
I am lost Captain,
And all the world will laugh at this, and scorn me:
Count me a heavy sleepy fool, a coward,
A coward past recovery, a confirmed coward,
One without carriage, or common sense.
Hoe's gone sir,
And put to sea amain, past our recovery,
Not a Boat ready to pursue; if there were any,
The people stand amazed so at their valour,
And the sudden fright of fire, none knows to execute.
Oh, I could tear my limbs, &amp; knock my boys brains
Against every post I meet; fooled with a fire?
It was a crafty trick.
No, I was lazy,
Confident sluggish lazy, had I but met 'em,
And changed a dozen blows, I had forgiven 'em,
By both these hands held up, and by that brightness
That gilds the worldwide light, by all our worships,
The hidden ebbes and flows of the blew Ocean,
I will not rest; no mirth shall dwell upon me,
Wine touch my mouth, nor any thing refresh me,
Till I be wholly quit of this dishonour:
Make ready my Barrato's instantly,
And what I shall intend—
We are your servants. 
Never tell me, you never cared to win me,
Never for my sake to attempt a deed,
Might draw me to a thought you sought my favour:
If not for love of me, for love of arms sir,
For that cause you profess, for love of honour,
Of which you stile your self the mighty Master,
You might have stepped out nobly, and made an offer,
As if you had intended something excellent,
Put on a forward face.
Dear Lady hold me—
I hold ye, as I find ye, a faint servant.
By—I dare doe—
In a Ladies chamber
I dare believe ye, there's no mortal danger:
Give me the man that dares doe, to deserve that:
I thought you Portuguese had been rare wonders,
Men of those haughty courages and credits,
That all things were confined within your promises,
The Lords of fate and fortune I believed ye,
But well I see I am deceived Ruy Dias,
And blame too late my much belief.
I am ashamed, Lady,
I was so dull, so stupid to your offer:
Now you have once more schooled me, I am right,
And something shall be thought on suddenly,
And put in act as soon, some preparation —
And give it out?
Yes, Lady, and so great too:
In which, the noise of all my Countrymen—
Those will doe well, for they are all approved ones,
And though he be restored alive.
I have ye.
For then we are both servants.
I conceive ye,
Good Madam give me leave to turn my fancies.
Do, &amp; make all things fit, &amp; then Isle visit you. 
My self, the cozen, and the Garrison,
The neighbours of the out-Isles of our nation,
Syana's strength, for I can humour him:
And proud Bekamus, I shall deceive his glory. 
What ringing sound of joy is this? whence comes it?
May be the Princes are in sport.
Where are ye?
Now Pyniero, what's the haste you seek me?
Doe you know this sign sir?
Ha!
Doe you know this emblem?
Your nose is board.
Board? what's that?
You're topped sir:
The Kings come home again, the King.
The devil?
Nay sure he came a gods name home:
Hoe's returned sir.
And all this joy ye hear—
Who durst attempt him?
The Princes are all here.
They are worthy Princes,
They are special Princes, all they love by ounces.
Believe it sir, it is done, and done most bravely and easily.
What fortune have ye lost sir?
What justice have ye now unto this Lady?
How stands your claim?
That ever man should be fooled so,
When he should doe and prosper; stand protesting,
Kissing the hand, and farting for a favour,
When he should be about his business sweating;
She bid you go, and picked you out a purpose,
To make your self a fortune by, a Lady, a Lady, and a lusty one,
A lovely, that now you may go look, she pointed ye,
Knowing you were a man of worth and merit,
And bid you fly, you have made a fair flight on it,
You have caught a goose.
How dare you thus molest me? 
It cannot bee.
Hark how the general joy rings!
Have you your hearing left? is not that drunk too?
For if you had been sober, you had been wise sure.
Done? who dares doe?
It seems an honest fellow,
That has ended his Market before you be up.
The shame on it 's a stranger too.
It is no shame,
He took her at her word, and tied the bargain,
Dealt like a man indeed, stood not demurring,
But clapped close to the cause, as he will doe to the Lady:
'Is a fellow of that speed and handsomeness,
He will get her with child too, ere you shall come to know him,
Is it not brave, a gentleman scarce landed,
Scarce eating of the air here, not acquainted,
No circumstance of love depending on him,
Nor no command to show him, must start forth,
At the first sight to—
I am undone.
Like an Oyster:
She neither taking view, nor value of him,
Unto such deeds as these — Pox o'these,
These wise delayings—
They make men cowards.
You are undone as a man would undo an egg,
A hundred shames about ye.
Can it be possible,
A stinger that I have not known, not seen yet,
A man I never graced; O Captain, Captain,
What shall I doe? I am betrayed by fortune,
It cannot be, it must not be.
It is Lady,
And by my faith a handsome Gentleman;
It is his poor Scholars prize.
Must I be given
Unto a man I never saw, ne'er spoke with,
I know not of what Nation?
Is a Portugal,
And of as good a pitch he will be given to you Lady,
For hoe's given much to handsome flesh.
Oh Ruy Dias,
This was your sloth, your sloth, your sloth Ruy Dias.
Your love sloth, Uncle doe you find it now?
You should have done at first, and faithfully: 
And then the tother had lied ready for ye;
Madam, the general joy comes.
We must meet it—but with what comfort?
Oh my dear brother what a joy runs through me,
To see you safe again, your self, and mighty,
What a blessed day is this?
Rise up fair sister,
I am not welcome till you have embraced me.
A general gladness sir flies through the City,
And mirth possesses all to see your Grace arrive,
Thus happily arrived again, and fairly;
It was a brave venture who so ever put for it,
A high and noble one, worthy much honour;
And had it failed, we had not failed great sir,
And in short time too to have forced the Governor,
In spite of all his threats.
I thank ye Gentleman.
And all his subtilties to set you free,
With all his heart and will too.
I know ye love me.
This had bin good with something done before it,
Something set off to beautify it, now it sounds empty like
A Barbers basin, pox there's no mettle in it, no noble marrow.
I have an army sir, but that the Governor,
The foolish fellow was a little provident,
And wise in letting slip no time, became him too,
That would have scoured him else, and all his confines;
That would have rung him such a peal —
Yes backward,
To make dogs houle, I know thee to a farthing,
Thy armye's good for hawks, there's
Nothing but sheeps hearts in it.
I have done nothing sir, therefore
I think it convenient I say little what I purposed,
And what my love intended.
I like your modesty,
And thank ye royal friends, I know it grieved ye
To know my misery; but this man Princes,
I must thank heartily indeed and truly,
For this man saw me in it, and redeemed me:
He looked upon me sinking, and then caught me.
This sister this, this all man, this all valour,
This pious man.
My countenance, it shames me,
One scarce arrived, not hardened yet, not
Read in dangers and great deeds, sea-sick, not seasoned —
Oh I have boyed my self.
This noble bulwark,
This lance and honour of our age and Kingdom;
This that I never can reward, nor hope
To be once worthy of the name of friend to,
This, this man from the bowels of my sorrows
Has new begot my name, and once more made me:
Oh sister, if there may be thanks for this,
Or any thing near recompense invented.
You are too noble sir, there is reward
Above my action too by millions:
A recompense so rich and glorious,
I durst not dream it mine, but that it was promised;
But that it was propounded, sworn and sealed
Before the face of heaven, I durst not hope it,
For nothing in the life of man, or merit,
It is so truly great, can else embrace it.
O speak it, speak it, bless mine ears to hear it,
Make me a happy man, to know it may be,
For still methinkes I am a prisoner,
And feel no liberty before I find it.
Then know it is your sister, she is mine sir,
I claim her by her own word, and her honour;
It was her open promise to that man
That durst redeem ye; Beauty set me on,
And fortune crowns me fair, if she receive me.
Receive ye sir — why sister — ha — so backward,
Stand as you knew me not, nor what he has ventured
My dearest sister.
Good sir pardon me,
There is a blushing modesty becomes her,
That holds her back; women are nice to woo sir;
I would not have her forced, give her fair liberty;
For things compelled and frighted of soft natures,
Turn into fears, and fly from their own wishes.
Look on my Quisara such another,
Oh all ye powers, so excellent in nature,
In honour so abundant.
I confess sir,
Confess my word is past too, he has purchased;
Yet good sir give me leave to think, but time
To be acquainted with his worth and person;
To make me fit to know it; we are both strangers,
And how we should believe so suddenly,
Or come to fasten our affections —
Alas, love has his complements.
Be sudden
And certain in your way, no women's doubles,
Nor coy delays, you are his, and so assure it,
Or cast from me and my remembrance ever;
Respect your word, I know you will, come sister,
Lets see what welcome you can give a prisoner,
And what fair looks a friend — Oh my most noble
Princes, no discontents, but all be lusty,
He that frowns this day is an open enemy:
Thus in my arms my dear.
You make me blush sir.
And now lead on —
Our whole Court crowned with pleasure.
Madam, despair not, something shall be done yet,
And suddenly and wisely.
O Ruy Dias. 
Well he's a brave fellow, &amp; he has deserved her richly,
And you have had your hands full I dare swear Gentlemē.
We have done something sir, if it hit right.
The woman has no eyes else, nor no honesty,
So much I think.
Come, let's go bounce amongst 'em,
To the Kings health, and my brave country-mans.
My uncle looks as though he were sick of the
Worms friends. 
MIne uncle haunts me up &amp; down, looks melancholy,
Wondrous proof melancholy, sometimes swears,
Then whistles, starts, cries, &amp; groans, as if he had the Bots.
As to say truth, I think he has little better,
And wo'd fain speak; bids me good morrow at midnight,
And good night when it is noon, has something hovers
About his brains, that would fine find an issue,
But cannot out, or dares not: still he follows; 
How he looks still, and how he beats about,
Like an old Dog at a dead sent? I marry,
There was a sigh would a set a ship a sailing:
These winds of love and honour blow at all ends.
Now speak and't be thy will: good morrow Uncle.
Good morrow sir.
This is a new salute:
Sure he has forgot me: this is pur-blinde Cupped.
My Nephew?
Yes sir, it I be not changed.
I would fine speak with you.
I would fine have ye sir,
For to that end I stay.
You know I love ye,
And I have loved you long, my dear Pyniero,
Bred and supplied you.
Whither walks this Preamble?
You may remember, though I am but your Uncle,
I sure had a fathers care, a fathers tenderness.
Sure he would wrap me into something now suddenly,
He doubts my nature in, for mine is honest,
He winds about me so.
A fathers diligence.
My private benefits, I have forgot sir,
But those you might lay claim to as my follower;
Yet some men would remember—
I doe daily.
The place which I have put ye in, which is no weak one,
Next to my self you stand in all employments,
Your counsels, cares, assignements with me equal,
So is my study still to plant your person;
These are small testimonies I have not forgot ye,
Nor would not be forgotten.
Sure you cannot.
O Pyniero—
Sir; what hangs upon you,
What heavy weight oppresses ye, ye have lost,
(I must confess, in those that understand ye)
Some little of your credit, but time will cure that;
The best may slip sometimes.
Oh my best Nephew—
It may be ye fear her too, that disturbs ye,
That she may fall her self, or be forced from ye.
She is ever true, but I undone for ever.
Oh that Armusia, that new thing, that stranger,
That flag stuck up to rob me of mine honour;
That murdering chain shot at me from my Country;
That goodly plague that I must court to kill me.
Now it comes flowing from him, I feared this,
Knew, he that durst be idle, durst be ill too,
Has he not done a brave thing?
I must confess it nephew, must allow it,
But that brave thing has undone me, has sunk me,
Has trod me like a name in sand to nothing,
Hangs betwixt hope and me, and threatens my ruin:
And if he rise and blaze, farewell my fortune;
And when thats set, whore's thy advancement Cozen?
That were a friend, that were a noble kinsman,
That would consider these; that man were grateful;
And he that durst doe something here durst love me.
You say true, it is worth consideration,
Your reasons are of weight, and mark me Uncle,
For I'll be sudden, and to'th' purpose with you.
Say this Armusia then were taken off,
As it may be easily done
How stands the woman?
She is mine for ever;
For she contemns his deed and him.
Pox on him,
Or if the single pox be not sufficient,
The hogs, the dogs, and devils pox possess him:
Faith this Armusia stumbles me, is a brave fellow;
And if he could be spared Uncle—
I must perish:
Had he set up at any rest but this,
Done any thing but what concerned my credit,
The everlasting losing of my worth.—
I understand you now, who set you on too;
I had a reasonable good opinion of the devil
Till this hour; and I see he is a knave indeed,
An arrant stinking knave, for now I smell him;
I'll see what may be done then, you shall know
You have a kinsman, but no villain Uncle,
Nor no betrayer of fair fame, I scorn it;
I love and honour virtue; I must have
Access unto the Lady to know her mind too,
A good word from her mouth you know may stir me;
A Ladies look at setting on—
You say well;
Here Cozen, here's a Letter ready for you,
And you shall see how nobly she'll receive you,
And with what care direct.
Farewell then Uncle,
After I have talked with her, I am your servant,
To make you honest if I can — else hate you.
Pray ye no more complements, my head is busy, heaven bless me;
What a malicious soul does this man carry?
And to what scurvy things this love converts us?
What stinking things, and how sweetly they become us?
Murder's a moral virtue with these Lovers,
A special piece of Divinity I take it:
I may be mad, or violently drunk,
Which is a whelp of that litter; or I may be covetous,
And learn to murder men's estates, thats base too;
Or proud, but thats a Paradise to this;
Or envious, and sit eating of my self
At others fortunes; I may lye, and damnably,
Beyond the patience of an honest hearer;
Cousin, Cut purses, sit in the stocks for apples.
But when I am a lover, Lord have mercy,
These are poor pelting sins, or rather plagues,
Love and Ambition draw the devils Coach.
How now! who are these? Oh my great Ladies followers,
Her riddle-founders, and her fortune-tellers,
Her readers of her love-lectures, her inflamers:
These doors I must pass through, I hope they are wide.
Good day to your beauties, how they take it to 'em?
As if they were fair indeed.
Good morrow to you sir.
That's the old Hen, the brood-bird? how she busies?
How like an Inventory of Lechery she looks?
Many a good piece of iniquity
Has past her hands, I warrant her—I beseech you,
Is the fair Princess stirring?
Yes marry is she sir,
But somewhat private: have you a business with her?
Yes forsooth have I, and a serious business.
May not we know?
Yes, when you can keep counsel.
How prettily he looks? he's a soldier sure,
His rudeness sits so handsomely upon him.
A good blunt gentleman.
Yes marry am I:
Yet for a push or two at sharp, an't please you —
My honest friend, you know not who you speak to:
This is the Princess Aunt.
I like her the better
And she were her Mother, (Lady) or her grandmother,
I am not so bashful but I can buckle with her.
Of what size is your business?
Of the long sixteens,
And will make way I warrant ye.
How fine he talks?
Nay in troth I talk but coursely, Lady,
But I hold it comfortable for the understanding:
How fine they won't draw me into ribaldry?
These wenches that live easily, live high,
And love these broad discourses, as they love posits;
These dry delights serve for preparatives.
Why doe you look so on me?
I am guessing
By the cast of your face, what the property of your place should be,
For I presume you turn a key sweet beauty,
And you another gravity, under the Princess,
And by my — I warrant ye good places,
Comely commodious feats.
Prithee let him talk still,
For me thinks he talks handsomely.
And truly
As near as my understanding shall enable me
You look as if you kept my Ladies secrets:
Nay doe not laugh, for I mean honestly,
How these young things tattle, when they get a toy by the end?
And how their hearts go pit a pat and look for it?
Would it not dance too, if it had a Fiddle?
Your gravity I guess, to take the Petitions,
And hear the lingering suits in love disposed,
Their sighs and sorrows in their proper place,
You keep the aim office.
Prithee suffer him,
For as I live hoe's a pretty fellow.
I love to here sometimes what men think of us:
And thus delivered freely, it is no malice:
Proceed good honest man.
I will, good Madam.
According to men's states and dignities,
Monies and movables, you rate their dreams,
And cast the Nativity of their desires,
If he reward well, all he thinks is prosperous:
And if he promise place, his dreams are Oracles;
Your ancient practique Art too in these discoveries,
Who loves at such a length, who a span farther,
And who draws home, yield you no little profit,
For these ye milk by circumstance.
Ye are cunning.
And as they Oil ye, and advance your spindle,
So you draw out the lines of love, your doors too,
The doors of destiny, that men must pass through;
These are fair places.
He knows all.
Your trap doors,
To pop fools in it, that have no providence,
Your little wickets, to work wise men, like wires through at,
And draw their states and bodies into Cobwebs,
Your Postern doors, to catch those that are cautelous,
And would not have the worlds eye find their knaveries:
Your doors of danger, some men hate a pleasure,
Unless that may be full of fears; your hope doors,
And those are fine commodities, where fools pay
For every new encouragement, a new custom;
You have your doors of honour, and of pleasure;
But those are for great Princes, glorious vanities,
That travel to be famous through diseases;
There be the doors of poverty and death too:
But these you doe the best you can to damme up,
For then your gain goes out.
This is a rare lecture.
Read to them that understand.
Beshrew me,
I dare not venture on ye, ye cut too keen sir.
We thank you sir for your good mirth 
You are a good Companion.
Here comes the Princess now, attend your business.
Is there no remedy? no hopes can help me?
No wit to set me free? whose there hoe?
Troubled? her looks are almost wilde:
What ails the Princess?
I know nothing she wants.
Who's that there with you?
Oh Signeur Piniero? you are most welcome:
How does your noble uncle?
Sad as you are Madam:
But he commends his service, and this Letter.
Go off, attend within—Fair sir, I thank ye,
Pray be no stranger, for indeed you are welcome;
For your own virtues welcome.
We are mistaken,
This is some brave fellow sure.
I'm sure hoe's a bold fellow:
But if she hold him so, we must believe it. 
Doe you know of this fair sir?
I guess it Madam,
And whither it intends: I had not brought it else.
It is a business of no common reckoning.
The handsomer for him that goes about it;
Slight actions are rewarded with slight thanks:
Give me a matter of some weight to wade in.
And can you love your Uncle so directly,
So seriously, and so full, to undertake this?
Can there be such a faith?
Dare you say I to it,
And set me on? it is no matter for my Uncle,
Or what I owe to him, dare you but wish it.
I would fine—
Have it done; say but so Lady.
Conceive it so.
I will, it is that I am bound too:
Your will that must command me, and your pleasure,
The fair aspects of those eyes, that must direct me:
I am no Uncles agent, I am mine own, Lady;
I scorn my able youth should plough for others,
Or my ambition serve for pay; I aim,
Although I never hit, as high as any man,
And the reward I reach at shall be equal,
And what love spurs me on to, this desire,
Makes me forget an honest man, a brave man,
A valiant, and a virtuous man, my country-man, Armusia,
The delight of all the Minions,
Is love of you, doting upon your beauty, the admiration of your excellence;
Make me but servant to the poorest smile,
Or the least grace you have bestowed on others,
And see how suddenly Isle work your safety,
And set your thoughts at peace; I am no flatterer,
To promise infinitely, and out-dream dangers;
To lye a bed, and swear men into Fevers,
Like some of your trim suitors; when I promise,
The light is not more constant to the world,
Then I am to my word — She turns for millions.
I have not seen a braver confirmed courage.
For a tun of Crowns she turns: she is a woman,
And much I fear a worse then I expected.
You are the object Lady, you are the eye
In which all excellence appears, all wonder,
From which all hearts take fire, all hands their valour:
And when he stands disputing, when you bid him,
Or but thinks of his estate, Father, Mother,
Friends, Wife, and Children,
'Is a fool, and I scorn him,
And be but to make clean his sword: coward
Men have forgot their fealty to beauty.
Had I the place in your affections,
My most unworthy uncle is fit to fall from,
Lived in those blessed eyes, and read the stories
Of everlasting pleasures figured there,
I would find out your cōmands before you thought 'em,
And bring 'em to you done, ere you dream't of 'em.
I admire his boldness.
This, or any thing;
Your brothers death, mine uncles, any mans,
No state that stands secure, if you frown on it.
Look on my youth, I bring no blastings to you,
The first flower of my strength, my faith.
No more sir;
I am too willing to believe, rest satisfied;
If you dare doe for me, I shall be thankful:
You are a handsome gentleman, a fair one,
My servant if you please; I feale it thus sir.
No more, till you deserve more. 
I am rewarded:
This woman's cunning, but she's bloody too;
Although she pulls her Talons in, she's mischievous;
Formed like the face of heaven, clear and transparent;
I must pretend still, bear 'em both in hopes,
For fear some bloody slave thrust in indeed,
Fashioned and fleshed to what they wish: well uncle,
What will become of this, and what dishonour
Follow this fatal shaft, if shot, let time tell,
I can but only fear, and cross to cross it. 
Why are you thus sad? what can grieve or vex you
That have the pleasures of the world, the profits,
The honour, and the loves at your disposes?
Why should a man that wants nothing, want his quiet?
I want what beggars are above me in, content:
I want the grace I have merited,
The favour, the due respect.
Does not the King allow it?
Yes and all honours else, all I can ask,
That he has power to give; but from his sister,
The scornful cruelty, forgive me beauty,
That I transgress from her that should look on me,
That should a little smile upon my service,
And foster my deserts for her own faiths sake;
That should at least acknowledge me, speak to me.
And you go whining up and down for this sir,
Lamenting and disputing of your grievances;
Sighing and sobbing like a sullen Schoole-boy,
And cursing good-wife fortune for this favour.
What would you have me doe?
Doe what you should doe,
What a man would doe in this case, a wise man,
An understanding man that knows a woman;
Knows her and all her tricks, her scorns &amp; all her trifles:
Go to her and take her in your arms and shake her,
Take her and toss her like a bar.
But be sure you pitch her upon a feather-bed,
Shake her between a pair of sheets sir,
There shake these sullen fits out of her, spare her not there,
There you may break her will, and bruise no bone sir.
Go to her.
Thats the way.
And tell her and boldly,
And doe not mince the matter, nor mock your self,
With being too indulgent to her pride:
Let her hear roundly from ye, what ye are,
And what ye have deserved, and what she must be.
And be not put off like a common fellow,
With the Princess would be private,
Or that she has taken physic, and admits none,
I would talk to her any where.
It makes me smile.
Now you look handsomely:
Had I a wench to win, I would so flutter her,
They love a man that crushes 'em to verjuice;
A woman held at hard meat is your spaniel.
Pray take our counsel sir.
I shall doe something,
But not your way, it shows too boisterous,
For my affections are as fair and gentle,
As her they serve. 
The King.
Why, how now friend?
Why doe you rob me of the company
I love so dearly sir, I have bin seeking you;
For when I want you, I want all my pleasure:
Why sad? thus sad still man; I will not have it;
I must not see the face I love thus shadowed.
And't please your Grace, methinks it ill becomes him,
A soldier should be jovial, high and lusty.
He shall be so, come, come, I know your reason,
It shall be none to cross you, ye shall have her,
Take my word, (it is a Kings word) ye shall have her,
She shall be yours or nothing, pray be merry.
Your grace has given me cause, I shall be sir,
And ever your poor servant.
Me my self sir,
My better self, I shall find time, and suddenly,
To gratify your loves too gentlemen,
And make you know how much I stand bound to you:
Nay it is not worth your thanks, no further complement;
Will you go with me friend?
I beseech your grace,
Spare me an hour or two, I shall wait on you,
Some little private business with my self sir,
For such a time.
Isle hinder no devotion,
For I know you are regular, Isle take you gentlemen,
Because hee shall have nothing to disturb him,
I shall look for your friend. 
I dare not fail sir: 
What shall I doe to make her know my misery,
To make her sensible? This is her woman,
I have a toy come to me suddenly,
It may work for the best, she can but scorn me,
And lower then I am I cannot tumble,
Isle try what ere my fate be—Good even fair one,
It is the brave stranger—A good night to you sir.
Now by my Ladies hand a goodly gentleman!
How happy shall she be in such a husband?
Would I were so provided too.
Good pretty one,
Shall I keep you company for an hour or two?
I want employment for this evening.
I am an honest man.
I dare believe ye:
Or if ye were not sir, that's no great matter,
We take men's promises, would ye stay with me sir?
So it please you; pray let's be better acquainted,
I know you are the Princess gentlewoman,
And wait upon her near.
It is like I doe so.
And may befriend a man, do him fair courtesies,
If he have business your way.
I understand ye.
So kind an office, that you may bind a gentleman
Hereafter to be yours, and your way too,
And ye may bless the hour you did this benefit,
Sweet handsome faces should have courteous minds,
And ready faculties.
Tell me your business,
Yet if I think it be to her, your self sir,
For I know what you are, and what we hold ye,
And in what grace ye stand, without a second
For that but darkens, you would doe it better,
The Princess must be pleased with your accesses,
I'm sure I should.
I want a Courtiers boldness,
And am yet but a stranger, I would fine speak with her:
It is very late, and upon her hour of sleep sir.
Pray ye wear this, and believe my meaning civil,
My business of that fair respect and carriage:
This for our more acquaintance. 
How close he kisses?
And how sensible the passings of his lips are?
I must do it, and I were to be hanged now, and I will do it,
He may doe as much for me, that's all I aim at,
And come what will on it, life or death, I'll do it,
For ten such kisses more, and it were high treason.
I would be private with her.
So you shall,
It is not worth thanks else, you must dispatch quick.
Suddenly.
And I must leave you in my chamber sir,
Where you must locke your self that none may see you,
It is close to her, you cannot miss the entrance,
When she comes down to bed.
I understand ye, and once more thank ye Lady.
Thank me but thus.
If I fail thee—
Come close then. 
It is late good Aunt, to bed, I am en unready,
My! woman will not be long away.
I would have you a little merrier first,
Let me sit by ye, and read or discourse
Something that ye fancy, or take my instrument.
No, no I thank you,
I shall sleep without these, I wrong your age Aunt
To make ye waite thus, pray let me entreat ye,
To morrow I'll see ye, I know you're sleepy,
And rest will be a welcome guest, you shall not, 
Indeed you shall not stay; oh here's my woman,
Good night, good night, and good rest Aunt attend you.
Sleep dwell upon your eyes, &amp; fair dreams court ye.
Come, where have you been wench? make me unready;
I slept but ill last night.
You'll sleep the better
I hope too night Madam.
A little rest contents me;
Thou love thy bed Panura.
I am not in love Lady,
Nor seldom dream of devils, I sleep soundly.
I'll swear thou dost, thy husband would not take it so well
If thou were married wench.
Let him take Madam
The way to waken me, I am no dormouse.
Husbands have larum bells, if they but
Ring once.
Thou art a merry wench.
I shall live the longer.
Prithee fetch my book.
I am glad of that.
I'll read a while before I sleep.
I will Madam.
And if Ruy Dias meet you and be importunate,
He may come in.
I have a better fare for you,
Now least in sight play I. 
Why should I love him?
Why should I dote upon a man deserves not,
Nor has no will to work it? who's there wench?
What are you? or whence come you?
Ye may know me,
I bring not such amazement noble Lady.
Who let you in?
My restless love that serves ye.
This is an impudence I have not heard of,
A rudeness that becomes a thief or russin;
Nor shall my brothers love protect this boldness,
You buil'd so strongly on, my rooms are sanctuaries,
And with that reverence they that seek my favours,
And humble fears, shall render their approaches.
Mine are no less.
I am Mistress of my self sir,
And will be so, I will not be thus visited;
These fears and dangers thrust into my privacy,
Stand further off, I le cry out else.
Oh dear Lady!
I see dishonour in your eyes.
There is none:
By all that beauty they are innocent;
Pray ye tremble not, you have no cause.
I'll dye first;
Before you have your will, be torn in pieces;
The little strength I have left me to resist you,
The gods will give me more, before I am forced
To that I hate, or suffer—
You wrong my duty.
So base a violation of my liberty?
I know you are bent unnobly; I'll take to me
The spirit of a man, borrow his boldness,
And force my women's fears into a madness,
And ere you arrive at what you aim at—
Lady,
If there be in you any women's pity?
And if your fears have not proclaimed me monstrous?
Look on me and believe me; is this violence?
Is it to fall thus prostrate to your beauty,
A ruffians boldness? is humility a rudeness?
The griefs and sorrows that grow here an impudence?
These forcings, and these fears I bring along with me,
These impudent abuses offered ye;
And thus high has your brothers favour blown me:
Alas dear Lady of my life, I came not
With any purpose rough, or desperate,
With any thought that was not smooth and gentle
As your fair hand, with any doubt or danger,
Far be it from my heart to fright your quiet;
A heavy curse light on it when I intend it.
Now I dare hear you.
If I had been mischievous,
As then I must be mad; or were a monster,
If any such base thought had harboured here,
Or violence that became not man,
You have a thousand bulwarks to assure you,
The holy powers bear shields to defend chastity;
Your honour and your virtues are such armours;
Your clear thoughts such defences; if you misdoubt still,
And yet retain a fear I am not honest,
Come with impure thoughts to this place;
Take this, and sheath it hear; be your own safety;
Be wise, and rid your fears, and let me perish;
How willing shall I sleep to satisfy you.
No, I believe now, you speak worthily;
What came you then for?
To complain, me beauty,
But modestly.
Of what?
Of your fierce cruelty,
For though I dye, I will not blame the doer:
Humbly to tell your grace, ye had forgot me:
A little to have touched at, not accused,
For that I dare not do, your scorns, pray pardon me
And be not angry, that I use the liberty
To urge that word, a little to have showed you
What I have been, and what done to deserve ye,
If any thing that love commands may reach ye,
To have remembered ye, but I am unworthy,
And to that misery false all my fortunes,
To have told ye, and by my life ye may believe me,
That I am honest, and will only marry
You, or your memory; pray be not angry.
I thank you sir, and let me tell you seriously,
Ye have taken now the right way to befriend ye,
And to beget a fair and clear opinion,
Yet to try your obedience—
I stand ready Lady,
Without presuming to ask any thing.
Or at this time to hope for further favour;
Or to remember services, or smiles;
Dangers you have past through, and rewards due to 'em;
Loves or despairs, but leaving all to me:
Quit this place presently.
I shall obey ye.
Ha?
Who's this?
What art thou?
A Gentleman.
Thou art no more I'm sure: oh it is Ruy Dias;
How high he looks, and harsh?
Is there not door enough,
You take such elbow room?
If I take it, I'll carry it.
Does this become you Princess?
The Captain's jealous,
Jealous of that he never durst deserve yet;
Go freely, go I'll give thee leave.
Your leave sir?
Yes my leave sir, I'll not be troubled neither,
Nor shall my heart ache, or my head be jealous,
Nor strange suspicious thoughts reign in my memory;
Go on, and do thy worst, I'll smile at thee;
I kiss your fair hand first, then farewell Captain. 
What a pure soul inherits here? what innocence?
Sure I was blind when I first loved this fellow,
And long to live in that fog still: how he blusters!
Am I your property? or those your flatteries,
The banquets that ye bid me to, the trust
I build my goodly hopes on?
Be more temperate.
Are these the shows of your respect and favour?
What did he here? what language had he with ye?
Did ye invite? could ye stay no longer?
Is he so gracious in your eye?
You are too forward.
Why at these private hours?
You are too saucy,
Too impudent to task me with those errors:
Do ye know what I am sir, and my prerogative?
Though you be a thing I have called bith' name of friend,
I never taught you to dispose my liberty;
How durst you touch mine honour? blot my meanings?
And name an action, and of mine but noble?
Thou poor unworthy thing, how have I graced thee?
How have I nourished thee, and raised thee hourly?
Are these the gratitudes you bring Ruy Dias?
The thanks? the services? I am fairly paid;
Was it not enough I saw thou were a Coward,
And shadowed thee? no noble sparkle in thee?
Daily provoked thee, and still found thee coward?
Raised noble causes for thee, strangers started at;
Yet still, still, still a Coward, ever Coward;
And with those taints, dost thou upbraid my virtues?
I was too blame
Lady.
So blindly bold to touch at my behaviour?
Durst thou but look amiss at my allowance?
If thou had been a brave fellow, thou had had some licence,
Some liberty I might have then allowed thee
For thy good face, some scope to have argued with me;
But being nothing but a sound, a shape,
The mere sign of a Soldier — of a Lover,
The dregs and draffy part, disgrace and jealousy,
I scorn thee, and contemn thee.
Dearest Lady,
If I have been too free—
Thou hast been too foolish,
And go on still, I'll study to forget thee,
I would I could, and yet I pity thee. 
I am not worth it, if I were, that's misery,
The next door is but death, I must aim at it. 
So far and truly you have discovered to me
The former currents of my life and fortune,
That I am bound to acknowledge ye most holy,
And certainly to credit your predictions
Of what are yet to come.
I am no liar,
It is strange I should, and live so near a neighbour;
But these are not my ends.
Pray ye sit good father,
Certain a reverend man, and most religious.
I, that beliefe's well now, and let me work then,
I'll make ye curse religion ere I leave ye;
I have lived a long time son, a mewed up man,
Sequestered by the special hand of heaven
From the worlds vanities, bid farewell to follies,
And shook hands with all heats of youth and pleasures,
As in a dream these twenty years I have slumbered,
Many a cold moon have I in meditation,
And searching out the hidden wills of heaven,
Lain shaking under, many a burning Sun
Has feared my body, and boiled up my blood,
Feebl'd my knees, and stamped a Meagerness
Upon my figure, all to find out knowledge,
Which I have now attained too, thanks to heaven,
All for my countries good too, and many a vision,
Many a misticke vision have I seen son,
And many a sight from heaven which has been terrible,
Wherein the goods and evils of these Islands
Were lively shadowed; many a charge I have had too,
Still as the time grew ripe to reveal these,
To travel and discover, now I am come son,
The hour is now appointed,
My tongue is touched, and now I speak.
Do holy man, I'll hear ye.
Beware these Portuguese, I say beware 'em,
These smooth faced strangers, have an eye upon 'em.
The cause is now the God's, hear, and believe King.
I do hear, but before I give rash credit,
Or hang too light on belief, which is a sin father;
Know I have found 'em gentle, faithful, valiant,
And am in my particular, bound to 'em,
I mean to some for my most strange deliverance.
O Son, the future aims of men, observe me,
Above their present actions, and their glory,
Are to be looked at: the stars show many turnings,
If you could see, mark but with my eyes pupil;
These men came hither as my vision tells me,
Poor, weatherbeaten, almost lost, starved, feebled,
Their vessels like themselves, most miserable;
Made a long suit for traffic, and for comfort,
To vent their childrens toys, cure their diseases:
They had their suit, they landed, and too th'rate
Grew rich and powerful, sucked the fat, and freedom
Of this most blessed Isle, taught her to tremble,
Witness the Castle here, the Citadel,
They have clapped upon the neck of your Tidore,
This happy town, till that she knew these strangers,
To check her when shoe's jolly.
They have so indeed father.
Take heed, take heed, I find your fair delivery,
Though you be pleased to glorify that fortune,
And think these strangers Gods, take heed I say,
I find it but a handsome preparation,
A fair faced Prologue to a further mischief:
Mark but the end good King, the pin he shoots at
That was the man delivered ye; the mirror,
Your Sister is his due; what's she, your heir sir?
And what's he a kin then to the Kingdom?
But heirs are not ambitious, who then suffers?
What reverence shall the Gods have? and what justice
The miserable people? what shall they doe?
He points at truth directly.
Think of these son:
The person, nor the manner I mislike not
Of your preserver, nor the whole man together,
Were he but seasoned in the faith we are,
No, our devotions learned.
You say right father.
To change our worships now, and our Religion?
To be traitor to our God?
You have well advised me,
And I will seriously consider father,
In the mean time you shall have your fair access
Unto my sister, advise her to your purpose,
And let me still know how the Gods determine.
I will, but my maine end is to advise
The destruction of you all, a general ruin,
And then I am revenged, let the Gods whistle. 
Indeed, I am right glad ye were not greedy,
And sudden in performing what I wild you,
Upon the person of Armusia,
I was afraid, for I well knew your valour,
And love to me.
It was not a fair thing uncle,
It showed not handsome, carried no man in it.
I must confess it was ill, and I abhor it,
Only this good has risen from this evil;
I have tried your honesty, and find proof,
A constancy that will not be corrupted,
And I much honour it.
This Bell sounds better.
My anger now, and that disgrace I have suffered,
Shall be more manly vented, and wiped off,
And my sick honour cured the right and straight way;
My Swords in my hand now nephew, my cause upon it,
And man to man, one valour to another,
My hope to his.
Why? this like Ruy Dias?
This carries something of some substance in it;
Some mettle and some man, this sounds a gentleman;
And now methinkes ye utter what becomes ye;
To kill men scurvily, it is such a dog trick,
Such a ratcatchers occupation —
It is no better,
But Pyniero now—
Now I do bravely.
The difference of our states slung by forgotten,
The full opinion I have won in service,
And such respects that may not show us equal,
Laid handsomely aside, only our fortunes,
And single manhoods—
In a service sir,
Of this most noble nature, all I am,
If I had ten lives more, those and my fortunes
Are ready for ye, I had thought ye had forsworn fighting,
Or banished those brave thoughts were wont to waite upon you Shows a Challenge
I am glad to see 'em called home again.
They are nephew,
And thou shall see what fire they carry in them,
Here, you guess what this means.
Yes, very well sir,
A portion of Scripture that puzzels many an interpreter.
As soon as you can find him—
That will not be long uncle,
And of my conscience heel be ready as quickly.
I make no doubt good Nephew, carry it so
If you can possible that we may sight.
Nay, you shall fight assure your self.
Pray ye hear me
In some such place where it may be possible
The Princess may behold us.
I conceive ye,
Upon the sand behind the Castle sir,
A place remote enough, and there be windows
Out of her lodgings too, or I am mistaken.
You're in the right, if ye can work that handsomely —
Let me alone, and pray be you prepared
Some three hours hence.
I will not fail.
Get you home,
And if you have any things to dispose of,
Or a few light prayers
That may befriend you, run 'em over quickly,
I warrant, I'll bring him on.
Farewell Nephew,
And when we meet again —
I, I, fight handsomely;
Take a good draught or two of wine to settle ye,
It is an excellent armour for an ill conscience Uncle;
I am glad to see, this mans conversion,
I was afraid fair honour had been bedrid,
Or beaten out of the Island, soldiers and good ones,
Intended such base courses? he will fight now;
And I believe too bravely; I have seen him
Curry a fellows carcass handsomely:
And in the head of a troop stand as if he had been rooted there,
Dealing large doles of death; what a rascal was I
I did not see his will drawn?
What does she here? 
If there be any mischief toward, a woman makes one still;
Now what new business is for me?
I was sending for ye,
But since we have met so fair,
You have saved that labour; I must entreat you sir—
Any thing Madam,
Your wills are my commands.
You're nobly courteous;
Upon my better thoughts Signeor Pyniero,
And my more peaceable considerations.
Which now I find the richer ornaments;
I would desire you to attempt no farther
Against the person of the noble stranger,
In truth I am ashamed of my share in it;
Nor be incited further by your uncle,
I see it will sit ill upon your person;
I have considered, and it will show ugly
Carried at best, a most unheard of cruelty;
Good sir desist—
You speak now like a woman,
And wondrous well this tenderness becomes ye;
But this you must remember—your command
Was laid on with a kiss, and seriously
It must be taken off the same way Madam,
Or I stand bound still.
That shall not endanger ye,
Look ye fair sir, thus I take off that duty.
Byth' mass it was soft and sweet,
Some bloods would bound now,
And run a tilt; do not you think bright beauty,
You have done me in this kiss a mighty favour,
And that I stand bound by virtue of this honour,
To do what ever you command me?
I think sir,
From me these are unusual courtesies,
And ought to be respected so; there are some,
And men of no mean rank, would hold themselves
Not poorly blessed to taste of such a bounty.
I know there are that would do many unjust things
For such a kiss, and yet I hold this modest;
All villainies body and soul dispense with,
For such a provocation, kill their kindred,
Demolish the fair credits of their Parents;
Those kisses I am not acquainted with, most certain Madam
The appurtenance of this kiss would not provoke me
To do a mischief, it is the devils own dance,
To be kissed into cruelty.
I am glad you make that use sir.
I am gladder
That you made me believe you were cruel,
For by this hand I know I am so honest,
However I deceived ye, it was high time too,
Some common slave might have been set upon it else,
That willingly I would not kill a dog
That could but fetch and carry for a woman,
She must be a good woman made me kick him,
And that will be hard to find, to kill a man,
If you will give me leave to get another,
Or any she that plaid the best game at it,
And fore a women's anger prefer her fancy.
I take it in you well.
I thank ye Lady,
And I shall study to confirm it.
Do sir,
For this time, and this present cause I 'low it,
Most holy sir.
Bless ye my royal daughter,
And in you, bless this Island heaven.
Good Aunt,
What think ye of this man?
Sure 'is a wise man,
And a religious, he tells us things have happened
So many years ago almost forgotten,
As readily, as if they were done this hour.
Does he not meet with your sharpe tongue?
He tells me Madam,
Marriage, and mouldy cheese will make me tamer.
A stubborn keeper, and worse fare,
An open stable, and cold care,
Will tame a Jade, may be your share.
Bear Lady, a sharp prophet, when this proves good
I'll bequeath you a skin to make ye a hood.
Lady I would talk with you.
Do reverend sir.
And for you good, for that that must concern ye,
And give ear wisely to me.
I shall father.
You are a Prinresse of that excellence,
Sweetness, and grace, that Angel-like fair feature,
Nay, do not blush, I doe not flatter you,
Nor do I dote in telling this, I am amazed Lady,
And as I think the gods bestowed these on ye,
The gods that love ye.
I confess their bounty.
Apply it then to their use, to their honour,
To them, and to their service give this sweetness;
They have an instant great use of your goodness;
You are a Saint esteemed here for your beauty,
And may a longing heart —
I seek no fealty,
Nor will I blemish that heaven has sealed on me,
I know my worth, indeed the Portuguese
I have at those commands, and their last services,
Nay, even their lives, so much I think my hansomnesse,
That what I shall enjoin —
Use it discreetly,
For I perceive ye understand me rightly,
For here the gods regard your help, and suddenly;
The Portuguese like sharpe thorns (mark me Lady)
Stick in our sides, like razors, wound religion,
Draw deep, they wound, till the life blood follows,
Our gods they spurn at, and their worships scorn,
A mighty hand they bear upon our government,
These are the men your miracle must work on,
Your heavenly form, either to root them out,
Which as you may endeavour will be easy,
Remember whose great cause you have to execute,
To nip their memory, that may not spring more,
Or fairly bring 'em home to our devotions,
Which will be blessed, and for which, you sainted,
But cannot be, and they go; let me buzzle.
Go up with me,
Where we'll converse more privately;
I'll show ye shortly how I hold their temper;
And in what chain their souls.
Keep fast that hold still,
And either bring that chain, and those bound in it,
And link it to our gods, and their fair worships,
Or daughter pinch their hearts a pieces with it,
I'll waite upon your grace.
Come reverend father.
Waite you below. 
If this prophet were a young thing,
I should suspect him now, he cleaves so close to her;
These holy coats are long, and hide in iniquities.
Away, away fool, a poor wretch,
These poor ones
Warm but their stomachs once —
Come in, thou art foolish. 
I am sorry sir my fortune is so stubborn,
To court my sword against my countryman,
I love my nation well, and where I find
A Portugal of noble name and virtue,
I am his humble servant. Signeor Pyniero,
Your person, nor your uncles am I angry with,
You are both fair Gentlemen in my opinion,
And I protest, I had rather use my sword
In your defences, then against your safeties;
It is me thinks, a strange dearth of enemies,
When we seek foes among our selves.
You are injured,
And you must make the best on it now, and readiest—
You see I am ready in the place; and armed
To his desire that called me.
Ye speak honestly,
And I could wish ye had met on terms more friendly,
But it cannot now be so. 
Turn sir, and see.
I have kept my word with ye uncle,
The Gentleman is ready. 
Ye are welcome.
Bid those fools welcome that affect your courtesy,
I come not to use complement, ye have wrongd' me,
And ye shall feel proud man ere I part from ye,
The effects of that, if fortune do not fool me;
Thy life is mine, and no hope shall redeem thee.
That's a proud word,
More then your faith can justify.
Sure they will fight.
She's there, I am happy.
Let 'em alone, let 'em kill one another,
These are the maine posts, if they fall, the buildings
Will tumple quickly.
How temperate Armusia?
No more, be quiet yet.
I am not bloody,
Nor do not feel such mortal malice in me,
But since we cannot both enjoy the Princess,
I am resolved to fight.
Fight home Armusia,
For if thou faint'st, or fall—
Do ye make all vantages?
Always; unto thy life I will not spare thee,
Nor look not for thy mercy.
I am armed then.
Stand still I charge ye nephew, as ye honour me.
And good Emanuel—not—
Ye speak fitly,
For we had not stood idle else.
I am sorry for it.
But since you will have it so—
Come sir.
I weight ye.
I marry this looks handsomely,
This is warm work.
Both fall an't be thy will. 
My Uncle dead?
Stand still, or my swords in—
Now brave Ruy Dias,
Now Whore's your confidence, your prayers? quickly
Your own spite has condemned ye.
Hold Armusia.
Most happy Lady.
Hold and let him rise,
Spare him for me.
A long life may he enjoy Lady.
What have you done? it is better they had all perished.
Peace father, I work for the best; Armusia,
Be in the garden an hour hence. 
I shall Madam.
Now as I live a Gentleman at all inches,
So brave a mingled temper saw I never.
Why are ye sad sir? how would this have grieved you,
If ye had fallen under a professed enemy?
Under one had taken vantage of your shame too?
Pray ye be at peace, I am so far from wronging ye,
Or glorying in the pride of such a victory,
That I desire to serve ye, pray look cheerfully
Doe you hear this sir? this love sir? do you see this Gentleman
How he courts ye? why doe you hold your head down?
Tic no high treason I take it, to be equalled,
To have a slip in the field, no sin that's mortal;
Come, come, thank fortune and your friend.
It may be
You think my tongue may prove your enemy;
And though restrained sometimes, out of a bravery
May take a license to disable ye:
Believe me sir, so much I hate that liberty,
That in a strangers tongue 't will prove an injury,
And I shall right you in it.
Can you have more Uncle?
Sir you have beat me both ways, yet so nobly,
That I shall ever love the hand that did it:
Fortune may make me worthy of some title
That may be near your friend.
Sir I must leave ye,
But with so hearty love, and pray be confident, 
I carry nothing from this place shall wrong ye.
Come, come, you are right again, sir love your honour,
And love your friend, take heed of bloody purposes,
And unjust ends, good heaven is angry with 'm;
Make your fair virtues, and your fame your mistress,
And let these trinkets go.
You teach well nephew,
Now to be honourable even with this Gentleman,
Shall be my business, and my ends his.
Sir, sir, you must doe something suddenly,
To stop his pride so great and high, he is shot up,
Upon his person too, your state is sunk else:
You must not stand now upon terms of gratitude,
And let a simple tenderness besot ye:
I'll bring ye suddenly where you shall see him,
Attempting your brave sister privately;
Mark but his high behaviour then.
I will Father.
And with scorn, I fear contempt too.
I hope not.
I will not name a lust;
It may be that also;
A little force must be applied upon him,
Now, now applied, a little force to humble him.
These sweet entreaties doe but make him wanton.
Take heed ye wrong him not.
Take heed to your safety,
I but fore warn ye King; if you mistrust me,
Or think I come unsent—
No I'll go with you. 
Madam, you see there's nothing I can reach at,
Either in my obedience, or my service,
That May deserve your love, or win a liking,
But a poor thought, but I pursue it seriously,
Take pleasure in your wills, even in your anger,
Which other men would grudge at, and grow stormy;
I study new humility to please ye,
And take a kind of joy in my afflictions,
Because they come from ye, I love my sorrows:
Pray Madam but consider—
Yes, I do sir,
And to that honest end I drew ye hither;
I know ye have deserved as much as man can,
And know it is a justice to requite you:
I know ye love.
If ever love was mortal,
And dwelt in man, and for that love command me,
So strong I find it, and so true, here Lady,
Something of such a greatness to allow me,
Those things I have done already, may seem foils too:
It is equity that man aspires to heaven,
Should win it by his worth, and not sleep to it.
Now stand close King and hear, and as you find him,
Believe me right, or let religion suffer.
I dare believe your worth without additions;
But since you are so liberal of your love sir,
And would be farther tried, I do intend it,
Because you shall not, or you would not win me
At such an easy rate.
I am prepared still,
And if I shrink—
I know ye are no coward,
This is the utmost trial of your constancy,
And if you stand fast now, I am yours, your wife sir;
You hold there's nothing dear that may achieve me,
Doubted or dangerous.
There's nothing, nothing:
Let me but know, that I may straight fly to it.
I'll tell you then, change your religion,
And be of one belief with me.
How?
Mark,
Worship our Gods, renounce that faith you are bred in;
It is easily done, I'll teach ye suddenly;
And humbly on your knees—
Ha! I'll be hanged first.
Offer as we do.
To the Devil Lady?
Offer to him I hate? I know the devil,
To dogs and cats? you make offer to them;
To every bird that flies, and every worm.
How terribly I shake? Is this the venture?
The trial that you talked off? where have I bin?
And how forgot my self? how lost my memory?
When did I pray or look up steadfastly?
Had any goodness in my heart to guide me?
That I should give this vantage to mine enemy;
The enemy to my peace, forsake my faith.
Come, come, I know ye love me.
Love ye this way?
This most destroying way? sure you but jest Lady.
My love and life are one way.
Love alone then, and mine another way,
I'll love diseases first,
Dote on a villain that would cut my throat,
Woo all afflictions of all sorts, kiss cruelty;
Have mercy heaven, how have I been wandering?
Wandering the way of lust, and left my maker?
How have I slept like Cork upon a water,
And had no feeling of the storm that tossed me?
Trod the blind paths of death? forsook assurance,
Eternity of blessedness for a woman?
For a young handsome face hazard my being?
Are not our powers eternal so their comforts?
As great and full of hopes as yours?
They are puppets.
Now mark him sir, and but observe him nearly,
Their comforts like themselves, cold senseless outsides;
You make 'em sick, as we are, peevish, mad,
Subject to age; and how can they cure us,
That are not able to resin themselves?
The Sun &amp; Moon we worship, those are heavenly,
And their bright influences we believe.
Away fool,
I adore the Maker of that Sun and Moon,
That gives those bodies light and influence,
That pointed out their paths, and taught their motions;
They are not so great as we, they are our servants,
Placed there to teach us time, to give us knowledge
Of when and how the swellings of the maine air,
And their returns again; they are but our stewards
To make the earth fat with their influence,
That she may bring forth her increase and feed us.
Shall I fall from this faith to please a woman?
For her embraces bring my soul to ruin?
I looked you should have said, make me a Christian,
Work that great cure, for 't is a great one woman;
That labour truly doe perform, that venture
The crown of all great trial, and the fairest:
I looked ye should have wept and kneeled to beg it,
Washed off your mist of ignorance, with waters
Pure and repentant, from those eyes; I looked
You should have brought me your chief god ye worship,
He that you offer humane blood and life to,
And made a sacrifice of him to memory,
Beat down his Altars, ruined his false Temples.
Now you may see.
Take heed, you go too far sir,
And yet I love to hear him; I must have ye,
And to that end I let you storm a little;
I know there must be some strife in your bosom
To cool and quiet ye, ere you can come back:
I know old friends cannot part suddenly,
There will be some let still, yet I must have ye,
Have ye of my faith too, and so enjoy ye.
Now I contemn ye, and I hate my self
For looking on that face lasciviously,
And it looks ugly now methinkes.
How Portugal?
It looks like death it self, to which it would lead me;
Your eyes resemble pale despair, they fright me,
And in their rounds a thousand horrid ruins,
Methinkes I see; and in your tongue hear fearfully
The hideous murmurs of weak souls have suffered;
Get from me, I despise ye, and know woman,
That for all this trap you have laid to catch my life in,
To catch my immortal life, I hate and curse ye,
Contemn your deities, spurn at their powers,
And where I meet your maumet Gods, I'll swing 'em
Thus o'er my head, and kick 'em into puddles,
Nay I will out of vengeance search your Temples,
And with those hearts that serve my God, demolish
Your shambles of wild worships.
Now, now you hear sir.
I will have my faith since you are so crafty,
The glorious cross, although I love your brother;
Let him frown too, I will have my devotion,
And let your whole State storm.
Enter and take him;
I am sorry friend that I am forced to do this.
Be sure you bind him fast.
But use him nobly.
Had it to me been done, I had forgiven it,
And still preserved you fair, but to our Gods sir —
Methinkes I hate 'em now,
To our Religion,
To these to be thus stubborn, thus rebellious
To threaten them.
Use all your violence,
I ask no mercy, nor repent my words;
I spit at your best powers; I serve one,
Will give me strength to scourge your gods.
Away with him.
To grind 'em into base dust, and disperse 'em,
That never more their bloody memories—
Clap him close up.
Good friend be cooler.
Never;
Your painted sister I despise too.
Softly.
And all her devilish arts laugh and scorn at,
Mock her blind purposes.
You must be temperate;
Offer him no violence I command you strictly.
Now thou art up I shall have time to speak too.
Oh how I love this man, how truly honour him.
DDo you know the news Gentlemen?
Would we knew as well sir
How to prevent it.
Is this the love they bear us,
For our late benefit? taken so maliciously,
And clapped up close? is that the thanks they render?
It must not be put up thus, smothered slightly,
It is such a base unnatural wrong.
I know,
They may think to doe wonders, aim at all,
And to blow us with a vengeance out of the Islands:
But if we be our selves honest and resolute,
And continue but Masters of our ancient courages,
Stick close and give no vantage to their villainies—
Nay if we faint or fall apiece now,
We are fools and worthy to be marked for misery;
Begin to strike at him they are all bound to?
To cancel his deserts? what must we look for
If they can carry this?
I'll carry coals then;
I have but one life, and one fortune Gentlemen,
But I'll so husband it to vex these rascals,
These barbarous slaves.
Shall we go charge 'em presently?
No that will be too weak, and too foole-hardy,
We must have grounds that promise safety friends,
And sure offence, we loose our angers else,
And worse then that, venture our lives too lightly.
Did you see mine Uncle? plague he these Barbarians,
How the rogues stick in my teeth, I know ye are angry,
So I am too, monstrous angry Gentlemen,
I am angry that I choke again.
You hear Armusias up, honest Arm:
Clapped up in prison friends, the brave Arm:
Here are fine boys.
We hope he shall not stay there.
Stay? no he must not stay, no talk of staying,
These are no times to stay; are not these Rascals?
Speak, I beseech ye speak, are they not Rogues?
Think some abominable names — are they not Devils?
But the devil's a great deal too good for 'em — fusty vile∣loins.
They are a kind of hounds.
Hounds were their fathers,
Old blear-eyed bob-tail'd hounds — Lord whore's my Uncle?
But what shall be done sir?
Done?
Yes to relieve him;
If it be not sudden they may take his life too.
They dare as soon take fire and swallow it,
Take stakes and thrust into their tails for glisters:
His life, why it is a thing worth all the Islands,
And they know will be rated at that value;
His very imprisonment will make the Town stench,
And shake and stink, I have physic in my hand for 'em
Shall give the goblins such a purge —
Your Uncle.
I hear strange news, and have bin seeking ye;
They say Armusia's prisoner.
It is most certain.
Upon what cause?
He has deserved too much sir;
The old heathen policy has light upon him,
And paid him home.
A most unnoble dealing.
You are the next if you can carry it tamely,
He has deserved of all.
I must confess it,
Of me so nobly too.
I am glad to hear it,
You have a time now to make good your confession,
Your faith will show but cold else, and for fashion,
Now to redeem all, now to thank his curtsy,
Now to make those believe that held you backward,
And an ill instrument, you are a Gentleman,
An honest man, and you dare love your Nation,
Dare stick to virtue though she be oppressed,
And for her own fair sake step to her Rescue:
If you live ages sir, and lose this hour,
Not now redeem, and vindicate your honour,
Your life will be a murmur, and no man in it.
I thank ye nephew, come along with me Gentle∣men,
We'll make 'em dancing sport immediately:
We are Masters of the Fort yet, we shall see
What that can doe.
Let it but spit fire finely,
And play their turrets, and their painted Palaces,
A frisking round or two, that they may trip it,
And caper in the air.
Come, we'll doe something
Shall make 'em look about, we'll send 'em plumbs
If they be not too hard for their teeth.
And fine Potatoes
Roasted in gunpowder, such a banquet sir
Will prepare their unmannerly stomachs.
They shall see
There is no safe retreat in villainy;
Come be high hearted all.
We are all on fire sir. 
I am ungrateful, and a wretch, persuade me not,
Forgetful of the mercy he showed me,
The timely noble pity — why should I
See him fast bound and fettered, whose true courtesy,
Whose manhood, and whose mighty hand set me free?
Why should it come from me? why I command this?
Shall not all tongues and truths call me unthankful?
Had the offence bin thrown on you, it is certain
It had been in your power, and your discretion
To have turned it into mercy, and forgiven it,
And then it had showed a virtuous point of gratitude,
Timely and nobly taken; but since the cause
Concerns the honour of our gods, and their title,
And so transcends your power, and your compassion,
A little your own safety if you saw it too,
If your too fond indulgence did not dazzle you,
It cannot now admit a private pity;
It is in their wills, their mercies, or revenges,
And these revolts in you show mere rebellious.
They are mild and pitiful.
To those repent.
Their nature's soft and tender.
To true hearts
That feel compunction for their trespasses:
This man defies 'em still, threatens destruction
And demolition of their arms and worship,
Spits at their powers; take heed ye be not found sir,
And marked a favourite of their dishonour;
They use no common justice.
What shall I doe
To deserve of this man —
If ye more bemoan him,
Or mitigate your power to preserve him,
I'll curse ye from the gods, call up their vengeance,
And fling it on your Land and you, I have charge for it;
I hope to wrack you all.
What ails my sister?
Why is she bound? why looks she so distractedly?
Who does doe this?
We did it, pardon sir,
And for her preservation — She is grown wilde,
And raving on the strangers love and honour,
Sometimes crying out, help, help, they will torture him,
They will take his life, they will murder him, presently,
If we had not prevented, violently
Have laid hands on her own life.
These are tokens
The gods displeasure is gone out, be quick,
And ere it fall doe something to appease 'em,
You know the sacrifice — I am glad it works thus.
How low and base thou look now that were noble?
No figure of a King methinks shows on you,
No face of Majesty, foul swarth ingratitude
Has taken off thy sweetness, base forgetfulness
Of mighty benefits, has turned thee Devil:
Thou hast persecuted goodness, innocence,
And laid a hard and violent hand on virtue,
On that fair virtue that should teach and guide us;
Thou hast wronged thine own preserver, whose least merit
Poised with thy maine estate, thou can not satisfy,
Nay put thy life in too, twill be too light still:
What hast thou done?
Go for him presently.
And once more we'll try it we can win him fairly:
If not, let nothing she says hinder ye, or stir ye;
She speaks distractedly — Do that the gods command ye:
Doe you know what ye say Lady?
I could curse thee too,
Religion and severity has steeled thee,
Has turned thy heart to stone; thou hast made the gods hard too,
Against their sweet and patient natures, cruel:
None of ye feel what bravery ye tread on?
What innocence? what beauty?
Pray be patient.
What honourable things ye cast behind ye?
What monuments of man?
Once more Armusia,
Because I love ye tenderly and dearly,
And would be glad to win ye mine, I wish ye,
Even from my heart I wish and woo ye—
What sir,
Take heed how ye persuade me falsely, then ye hate me;
Take heed how ye entrap me.
I advise ye,
And tenderly and truly I advise ye,
Both for your souls health and your safety.
Stay,
And name my soul no more, she is too precious,
Too glorious for your flatteries, too secure too.
Consider the reward sir, and the honour
That is prepared, the glory you shall grow to.
They are not to be considered in these cases,
Not to be named when souls are questioned;
They are vain and flying vapors — touch my life,
It is ready for ye, put it to what test
It shall please ye, I am patient; but for the rest
You may remove rocks with your little fingers,
Or blow a mountain out of the way, with bellows,
As soon as stir my faith; use no more arguments.
We must use tortures then.
Your worst and paineful'st
I am joyful to accept.
You must the sharpest,
For such has been your hate against our deities
Delivered openly, your threats and scornings,
And either your repentance must be mighty,
Which is your free conversion to our customs,
Or equal punishment, which is your life sir.
I am glad I have it for ye, take it Priest,
And all the miseries that shall attend it:
Let the Gods glut themselves with Christian blood,
It will be asked again, and so far followed,
So far revenged, and with such holy justice,
Your Gods of gold shall melt and sink before it;
Your Altars, and your Temples shake to nothing;
And you false worshippers, blind fools of ceremony,
Shall seek for holes to hide your heads, and fears in,
For seas to swallow you from this destruction,
Darkness to dwell about ye, and conceal ye,
Your mothers wombs again—
Make the fires ready,
And bring the several tortures out.
Stand fast sir,
And fear 'em not, you that have stepped so nobly
Into this pious trial start not now,
Keep on your way, a virgin will assist ye,
A virgin won by your fair constancy,
And glorying that she is won so, will dye by ye;
I have touched ye every way, tried ye most honest,
Perfect, and good, chaste, blushing chaste, and temperate,
Valiant, without vaineglory, modest, stayed,
No rage, or light affection ruling in you:
Indeed, the perfect school of worth I find ye,
The temple of true honour.
Whether will she?
What do you infer by this fair argument Lady?
Your faith, and your religion must be like ye,
They that can show you these, must be pure mirrors,
When the streams flow clear and fair, what are fountains?
I do embrace your faith sir, and your fortune;
Go one, I will assist ye, I feel a sparkle here,
A lively spark that kindles my affection,
And tells me it will rise to flames of glory:
Let 'em put on their angers, suffer nobly,
Show me the way, and when I faint instruct me;
And if I follow not—
O blessed Lady,
Since thou art won, let me begin my triumph,
Come clap your terrors on.
All your fell tortures.
For there is nothing he shall suffer brother,
I swear by new faith which is most sacred,
And I will keep it so, but I will follow in,
And follow to a scruple of affliction,
In spite of all your Gods without prevention.
Death she amazes me.
What shall be done now?
They must dye both,
And suddenly, they will corrupt all else;
This woman makes me weary of my mischief,
She shakes me, and she staggers me, go in sir.
I'll see the execution.
Not so sudden:
If they go all my friends and sisters perish.
Would I were safe at home again.
Arm, arm sir,
Seek for defence, the Castle plays and thunders,
The Town Rocks, and the houses fly in the air,
The people dye for fear—Captain Ruy Dias,
Has made an Oath he will not leave a stone here;
No not the memory, here has stood a City,
Unless Armusia be delivered fairly.
I have my fears: what can our gods do now for us?
Be patient, But keep him still: he is a cure sir
Against both rage and Cannon: go and fortify,
Call in the Princess, make the Palace sure,
And let 'em know you are a King: look nobly;
And take your courage to ye; keep close the prisoner,
And under command, we are betrayed else.
How joyfully I go?
Take my heart with thee.
I hold a Wolf by the ear now:
Fortune free me. 
Heaven bless us,
What a thundring's here? what fire-spitting?
We cannot drink, but our Cans are mald amongst us.
I would they would mall our skores too:
Shame o'their Guns, I thought they had been bird-pots,
Or great Candlecases, how devilishly they bounce,
And how the Bullets borrow a piece of a house here,
There another, and mend those up again
With another parish; here flies a poudring-tub,
The meat ready roasted &amp; there a barrel pissing vinegar,
And they two over-taking the top of a high Steeple,
Newly sliced off for a sallet.
A vengeance fire 'em.
Nay they fire fast enough;
You need not help 'em.
Are these the Portugal Bulls—
How loud they bellow?
Their horns are plague strong, they push down Palaces
They toss our little habitations like whelps,
Like grindle-tailes, with their heals upward;
All the windows in the town dance a new trench-more,
It is like to prove a blessed age for Glasiers,
I met a hand, and a Letter in it in great haste,
And by and by a single leg running after it,
As if the Arm had forgot part of his arrant,
Heads she like foot-balls every where.
What shall we doe?
I care not, my shop's cancelled,
And all the Pots and earthen pans in it vanished:
There was a single Bullet and they together by the ears;
You would have thought Tom Tumbler had been there,
And all his troop of devils.
Let's to the King,
And get this gentleman delivered handsomely;
By this hand there's no walking above ground else.
By this leg—Let me swear nimbly by it,
For I know not how long I shall owe it,
If I were out of the Town once, if I came in again to
Fetch my breakfast, I will give 'em leave to cram me
With a Portugal pudding: Come, let's doe any thing
To appease this thunder, 
Art sure it was that blind priest?
Yes most certain,
He has provoked all this; the King is merciful,
And wondrous loving; but he fires him on still,
And when he cools enrages him, I know it,
Threatens new vengeance, and the gods fierce justice
When he but looks with fair eyes on Armusia,
Will lend him no time to relent; my royal Mistress,
She has entertained a Christian hope.
Speak truly.
Nay it is most true, but Lord, how he lies at her,
And threatens her, and flatters her, and dams her,
And I fear, if not speedily prevented,
If she continue stout, both shall be executed.
Isle kiss thee for this news: nay more Panura,
If thou wilt give me leave, Isle get thee with Christian,
The best way to convert thee.
Make me believe so.
I will y'faith. But which way came thou hither?
The Palace is close guarded, and barricaded.
I came through a private vault, which few there know of;
It rises in a Temple not far hence,
Close by the Castle here.
How—To what end?
A good one:
To give ye knowledge of my new-borne Mistress,
And in what doubt Armusia stands,
Think any present means, or hope to stop 'em
From their fell ends: the Princes are come in too,
And they are hardened also.
The damned Priest—
Sure he's a cruel man, methinks Religion
Should teach more temperate lessons.
He the fire-brand?
He dare to touch at such fair lives as theirs are?
Well Prophet, I shall prophecy, I shall catch ye,
When all your Prophecies will not redeem ye?
Wilt thou doe one thing bravely?
Any good I am able.
And by thine own white hand Isle swear thou art virtuous,
And a brave wench, durst thou but guide me presently
Through the same vault thou came into the Palace,
And those I shall appoint, such as I think fit.
Yes, I will doe it, and suddenly, and truly.
I would fine behold this Prophet.
Now I have ye;
And shall bring ye where ye shall behold him,
Alone too, and unfurnished of defences:
That shall be my care; but you must not betray me.
Dost thou think we are so base? such slaves, rogues?
I doe not:
And you shall see how fairly Isle work for ye.
I must needs steal that Priest,
Steal him, and hang him.
Do any thing to remove his mischief, strangle him—
Come prithee love.
You'll offer me no foul play?
The Vault is dark.
It was well remembered.
And ye may —
But I hold ye honest.
Honest enough, I warrant thee.
I am but a poor weak wench; and what with the place,
And your persuasions Sir — but I hope you will not;
You know we are often cozn'd.
If thou dost fear me,
Why dost thou put me in mind?
To let you know sir,
Though it be in your power, and things fitting to it,
Yet a true gent—
I know what he will doe:
Come and remember me, and Isle answer thee,
Isle answer thee to the full; we'll call at th'Castle,
And then my good guide do thy will; shall it find me
A very tractable man.
I hope I shall sir. 
Let my men guard the gates.
And mine the Temple,
For fear the honour of our gods should suffer,
And on your lives be watchful.
And be valiant;
And let's see, if these Portuguese dare enter;
What their high hearts dare doe: Let's see how readily,
The great Ruy Dias will redeem his Countrymen;
He speaks proud words, and threatens.
He is approved sir,
And will put fair for what he promises;
I could wish friendlier terms,
Yet for our Liberties, and for our gods,
We are bound in our best service
Even in the hazard of our lives.
Come up Princes,
And give your counsels, and your helps, the Fort still
Plays fearfully upon us, beats our buildings,
And turns our people wild with fears.
Send for the prisoner,
And give us leave to argue. 
Come on nobly,
And let the Fort play still, we are
Strong enough to look upon 'em,
And return at pleasure; it may
Be on our view they will return him.
We will return 'em such thanks else,
Shall make 'im scratch where it itches not.
How the people stare,
And some cry, some pray, and some curse heartily:
But it is the King —
I cannot blame their wisdoms,
They are all above, Armusia chained and bound too?
O these are thankful Squires.
Hear us Ruy Dias,
Be wise and hear us, and give speedy answer,
Command thy Cannon presently to cease,
No more to trouble the afflicted People,
Or suddenly Armusias head goes off,
As suddenly as seeaid.
Stay Sir, be moderate.
Doe nothing that's dishonourable Ruy Dyas,
Let not the fear of me master thy valour;
Pursue 'em still, they are base malicious people.
Friend be not desperate.
I scorn your courtesies;
Strike when you dare, a fair arm guide the Gunner,
And may he let fly still with fortune: friend,
Doe me the honour of a soldiers funerals,
The last fair Christian right, see me in the ground,
And let the palace burn first, then the Temples,
And on their scorned gods erect my monument:
Touch not the Princess, as you are a soldier.
Which way you go, sir,
I must follow necessary.
One life, and one death.
Will you take a truce yet?
No, no, go on:
Look here your god, your Prophet.
How came he taken?
I Conjured for him King.
I am sure Cur at an old blind Prophet.
Isle haunt ye such a false knave admirably,
A terrier I; I earthed him, and then snapped him;
Saving the reverence of your grace, we stole him
Even out of the next chamber to ye.
Come, come, begin King,
Begin this bloody matter when you dare;
And yet I scorn my sword should touch the rascal,
Isle tear him thus before ye. Ha!
What art thou? 
How's this!
Art thou a Prophet?
Come down Princes.
We are abused—
Oh my most dear Armusia—
Off which his chains. And now my noble sister,
Rejoice with me, I know ye are pleased as I am.
This is a precious Prophet. Why Don Governor,
What make you here? how long have you taken orders?
Why what a wretch
Art thou to work this mischief?
To assume this holy shape to ruin honour,
Honour and chastity?
I had paid you all,
But fortune plaid the slut. Come,
Give me my doom.
I cannot speak for wonder.
Nay, it is I sir,
And here I stay your sentence.
Take her friend,
You have half persuaded me to be a Christian,
And with her all the joys, and all the blessings.
Why what dream have we dwelt in?
All peace to ye,
And all the happiness of heart dwell with ye,
Children as sweet and noble as their Parents.
And Kings at least.
Good Sir forget my rashness.
And noble Princess, for I was once angry,
And out of that might utter some distemper,
Think not it is my nature.
Your joy is ours sir,
And nothing we find in ye, But most noble.
To prison with this dog, there let him houle,
And if he can repent, sigh out his villainies:
His Island we shall seize into our hands,
His father and himself have both usurped it,
And kept it by oppression; the Town and Castle,
In which I lay my self most miserable,
Till my most honourable friend redeemed me,
Signeur Pyniero I bestow on you,
The rest of next command upon these gentlemen,
Upon ye all my love.
O brave Ruy Dias.
You have started now beyond me. I must thank ye,
And thank ye for my life, my wife and honour.
I am glad I had her for you sir.
Come Princes,
Come friends and lovers all, come noble gentlemen,
No more guns now, nor hates but joys and triumphs,
An universal gladness fly about us:
And know however subtle men dare cast,
And promise wrack, the gods give peace at last.

