PLeasure attend ye, and about ye sit
The springs of mirth fancy delight and wit
To stir you up, doe not your looks let fall,
Nor to remembrance our late errors call,
Because this day w'are Spaniards all again,
The story of our Play, and our Scene Spain:
The errors too, doe not for this cause hate,
Now we present their wit and not their state.
Nor Ladies be not angry if you see,
A young fresh beauty, wanton and too free,
Seek to abuse your Husband, still tic Spain,
No such gross errors in your Kingdom reigns,
W'are Vestalls all, and though we blow the fire,
We seldom make it flame up to desire,
Take no example neither to begin,
For some by president delight to sin:
Nor blame the Poet if he slip aside,
Sometimes lasciviously if not too wide.
But hold your Fans close, and then smile at ease,
A cruel Scene did never Lady please.
Nor Gentlemen, pray be not you di•pleased,
Though we present some men fooled some diseased,
Some drunk, some mad: we mean not you, you're free,
We tax no farther then our Comedy,
You are our friends sit noble then and see.
ARe your companies full Coronell?
No not yet sir:
Nor will not be this month yet, as I rec∣kon.
How rises your command?
We pick up still, and as our monies hold out,
We have men come, about that time I think
We shall be full too, many young gallants go.
And unexperienced,
The wars are dainty dreams to young hot spirits,
Time and experience will allay those visions,
We have strange things to fill our numbers,
There's one Don Leon, a strange goodly fellow,
Recommended to me from some noble Friends,
For my Alfores, had you but seen his person,
And what a Giants promise it protests.
I have heard of him and that he hath served before too.
But no harm done, nor never meant, Don Michael
That came to my ears yet, ask him a question,
He blushes like a girl, and answers little,
To the point less, he wears a sword a good one,
And good clothes too, he is whole skinned, has no hurt yet,
Good promising hopes, I never yet heard certainly
Of any Gentleman that saw him angry.
Preserve him, he will conclude a peace if need be,
Many as strong as he will go along with us,
That swear as valiantly as heart can wish,
Their mouth charged with six oaths at once, and whole once,
That make the drunken Dutch creep into mole-hils.
Tic true, such we must look for, but Michael Perez,
When heard you of Donna Margarita, the great heiresse.
I hear every hour of her, though I never saw her,
She is the main discourse, noble Don Iuan de Castro,
How happy were that man cood catch this wench up,
And live at ease, she is fair, and young, and wealthy,
Infinite wealthy, and as gracious too
In all her entertainments, as men report.
But she is proud sir, that I know for certain,
And that coms seldom without wantonness,
He that shall marry her, must have a rare hand.
Would I were married, I would find that wisdom,
With a light reyne to rule my wife, if ever woman
Of the most subtlest mould went beyond me,
I would give the boys leave to whoote me out of the parish.
Sir there be two gentlewomen attend to speak
With ye.
Wait on them in.
Are they two handsome women?
They seem so, very handsome, but they are veiled sir.
Thou putst' sugar in my mouth, how it melts with me,
I love a sweet young wench.
Wait on them in I say.
Don Iuan.
How you itch Michael, how you burnish!
Will not this soldiers heat out of your bones yet,
Doe your eyes glow now?
There be two.
Say honest, what shame have you then.
I would fine see that,
I have been in the Indies twice, &amp; have seen strange things,
But two honest women: one I read of once.
Pre thee be modest.
Isle be any thing.
You are welcome Ladies.
Both hooded, I like um well though,
They come not for advice in law sure heather,
Maybe they would learn to raise the pick,
I am for um. They are very modest, tic a fine preludium.
With me or with this gentleman,
would you speak Lady?
With you sir as I guess, Iuan de Castro.
Her curtain opens, she is a pretty gentlewoman.
I am the man, and shall be bound to fortune,
I may doe any service to your beauties.
Captain, I hear you are marching down to Flanders,
To serve the Catholic King.
I am sweet Lady.
I have a kinsman and a noble friend,
Employed in those wars, may be sir you know him,
Don Campusano Captain of Carbines,
To whom I would request your Nobleness,
To give this poor remembrance.
I shall doe it,
I know the Gentleman a most worthy Captain.
Something in private.
Step aside: Isle serve thee.
Prithee let me see thy face.
Sir you must pardon me,
Women of our sort that maintain fair memories,
And keep suspect off from their chastities,
Had need wear thicker v•isles.
I am no blaster of a Ladies beauty,
Nor bold intruder on her special favours,
I know how tender reputation is,
And with what guards it ought to be preserved Lady,
You may to me.
You must excuse me Seignior, I come
Not here to sell my self.
As I am a Gentleman, by the honour of a soldier•
I believe you.
I pray you be civil, I believe you would see me,
And when you have seen me, I believe you will like me.
But in a strange place, to a stranger too,
As if I came on purpose to betray you,
Indeed I will not.
I shall love you dearly,
And tic a sin to fling away affection,
I have no Mistress, no desire to honour
Any but you• will not this oyster open?
I know not, you have struck me with your modesty,
She will draw sure; so deep, and taken from me?
All the desire I might bestow on others;
Quickly before they come.
Indeed I dare not.
But since I see you are so desirous Sir
To view a poor face that can merit nothing
But your repentance.
It must needs be excellent.
And with what honesty you ask it of me.
When I am gone let your man follow me,
And view what house I enter, thither come,
For there I dare be bold to appear open.
And as I like your virtuous carriage then,
I shall be able to give welcome to you,
She hath done her business, I must take my leave sir.
Isle kiss your fair white hand, and thank ye Lady,
My man shall wait, and I shall be your servant,
Sirrah, come near, hark.
I shall doe it faithfully.
You will command me no more services?
To be careful of your noble health, dear Sir,
That I may ever honour you.
I thank you,
And kiss your hands, wait on the Ladies down there.
You had the honour to see the face that came to you.
And •it was a fair one, what was yours, don Michael?
Mine was in the 'clipse, and had a cloud drawn over it
But I believe well, and I hope tic handsome,
She had a hand would stir a holy Hermit.
You know none of um?
No.
Then I doe Captain,
But isle say nothing till I see the proof on it,
Sit close Don Perez, or your worship's caught,
I fear a fly.
Were those she brought love letters?
A packet to a kinsman now in Flanders;
Yours was very modest me thought.
Some young unmanaged thing;
But I may live to see—
Tic worth experience,
Let's walk abroad and view our companies.
What are you for the wars Alonzo?
It may be I,
It may be no, even as the humour takes me,
If I find peace amongst the female creatures,
And easy entertainment, isle stay at home,
I am not so far obliged yet to long marches,
And mouldy biscuits to run mad for honour,
When you are all gone I have my choice before me.
Of which hospital thou wilt sweat in; wilt thou
Never leave whoring?
There is less danger in it then gunning Sanchio,
Though we be shot sometimes the shot's not mortal,
Besides it breaks no limbs.
But it disables um,
D'ost thou see how thou pul'st thy legs after thee, as they
Hung by points.
Better to pull um thus then walk on wooden ones,
Serve bravely for a billet to support me.
Fie, fie, tic base.
Dost thou count it base to suffer?
Suffer abundantly, tic the crown of honour;
You think it nothing to lie twenty days
Under a surgeons hands that has no mercy.
As thou hast done I am sure but I perceive now
Why you desire to stay, the orient heiresse,
The Margarita sir.
I would I had his.
They say she will marry.
Yes, I think she will.
And marry suddenly as report goes too,
She fears his youth will not hold out Alonzo.
I would I had the sheathing on it.
They say too
She has a greedy eye that must be fed
With more then one mans meat.
Would she were mine,
I would cater for her well enough: but Sanchio,
There be too many great men that adore her,
Princes, and Princes fellows that claim privilege.
Yet those stand off in the way of marriage,
To be tied to a mans pleasure is a second labour.
She has bought a brave house here in town.
• have heard so.
If she convert it now to pious uses,
And bid poor Gentlemen welcome.
When comes she to it?
Within these two days, she is in the country yet,
And keeps the noblest house.
Then there's some hope of her,
Wilt thou go my way?
No, no, I must leave you
And repair to an old Gentlewoman
That has credit with her, that can speak a good word.
Send thee good fortune, but make thy body sound first.
I am a soldier,
And too sound a body becomes me not,
Farewell Sanchio.
Tic this• or that house, or I have lost mine aim,
They are both fair buildings, she walked plaguy fast,
And hereabouts I lost her, stay, that's she,
Tic very she,—she makes me a low curtsy,
Let me note the place, the street I well remember.
She is in again, certain some noble Lady,
How happy should I be if she love my Master:
A wondrous goodly house, here are brave lodgings,
And I shall sleep now like an Emperor,
And eat abundantly• I thank my fortune,
Isle back with speed• and bring him happy tidings.
What should it mean, that in such hast
We are sent for?
Belike the Lady Margaret has some business
She would break to us in private.
It should seem so.
Tic a good Lady, and a wise young Lady.
And virtuous enough too I warrant ye
For a young woman of her years: tic pity
To load her tender age with too much virtue.
Tic more sometimes then we can well away with.
Good morrow Ladies.
Morrow my good Madam.
How does the sweet young beauty, Lady Margaret?
Has she slept well after her walk last night?
Are her dreams gentle to her mind?
Ell's well,
Shoe's very well, she sent for you thus suddenly
To give his counsel in a business
That much concerns her.
She does well and wisely,
To ask the counsel of the ancientst Madame,
Our years have run through many things she knows not.
She would fine marry.
Tic a proper calling,
And well beseems her years, who would she yoke with?
Thats left to argue on, I pray come in
And break your fast, drink a good cup or two,
To strengthen your understandings, then sheele tell ye.
And good wine breeds good counsel,
Wele yield to ye.
Have you seen any service?
Yes.
Where?
Every where.
What office bore ye?
None, I was not worthy.
What Captains know you?
None, they were above me.
Were you never hurt?
Not that J well remember,
But once J stole a Hen, and then they beat me;
Pray ask me no long questions, J have an ill memory.
This is an Ass, did you never draw your sword yet?
Not to doe any harm I thank heaven for it.
Nor ne'er tan prisoner?
No, • ran away,
For • had ne'er no money to redeem me.
Can you endure a Drum?
It makes my head ache.
Are you not valiant when you are drunk?
I think not, but I am loving Sir.
What a lump is this man,
Was your Father wise?
Too wise for me •'me sure,
For he gave all he had to my younger brother.
That was no foolish part isle bear you witness.
Can thou lye with a woman?
I think I could make shift sir,
But I am bashful.
In the night?
I know not,
Darkness indeed may doe some good upon me.
Why art thou sent to me to be my officer,
I, and commended too, when thou dare not fight?
There be more officers of my opinion,
Or I am consent sir, men that talk more too.
How wilt thou scope a bullet?
Why by chance,
They aim at honourable men, alas I am none sir.
This fellow has some doubts in's talk that striks me,
He cannot be all fool: welcome Alonzo.
What have you got there temperance into your cō∣pany?
The spirit of peace? we shall have wars
By th'ounce then, O here's another Pumpion,
Let him loos for luck sake, the crammed son
Of a starved Usurer, Cacafogo, both their brains butterd,
Cannot make two spoonefulls.
My Fathers dead: I am a man of war too,
Monies, demeans; I have ships at sea too,
Captains.
Take heed of the Hollanders, your ships may leake else.
I scorn the Hollanders, they are my drunkards.
Put up your gold sir, isle borrow it else.
I am satisfied, you shall not,
Come out, I know thee, meet mine anger instantly.
I never wronged ye.
Thou hast wronged mine honour,
Thou look upon my Mistress thrice lasciviously,
Isle make it good.
Doe not heat your self, you will surfeit.
Thou wan'st my money too, with a pair of base bones,
In whom there was no truth, for which I beat thee,
I beat thee much, now I will hurt thee dangerously.
This shall provoke thee.
You struck too low by a foot sir.
You must get a ladder when you would beat
This fellow.
I cannot choose but kick again, pray pardon me.
Had thou not asked my pardon, I had killed thee,
I leave thee as a thing despised, assoles manus a la siniare a Maestro.
You have escaped by miracle, there is not in all Spain,
A spirit of more fury then this fire drake.
I see he is hasty, and I would give him leave,
To beat me soundly if he would take my bond.
What shall I doe with this fellow?
Turn him off,
He will infect the camp with cowardice,
If he go with thee.
About some week hence sir,
If I can hit upon no abler officer,
You shall hear from me.
I desire no better.
You have made me now too bountiful amends, Lady
For your strict carriage when you saw me first,
These beauties were not meant to be concealed,
It was a wrong to hide so sweet an object,
I cooed now chide ye, but it shall be thus,
No other anger ever touch your sweetness.
You appear to me so honest, and so civil,
Without a blush sir, I dare bid ye welcome.
Now let me ask your name.
Tic Estifanie, the heir of this poor place.
Poor doe you call it,
There's nothing that I cast mine eyes upon,
But shows both rich and admirable, all the rooms
Are hung as if a Princess were to dwell here,
The Gardens, Orchards, every thing so curious:
Is all that plate your own too?
Tic but little,
Only for present use, I have more and richer,
When need shall call, or friends compel me use it,
The suits you see of all the upper chambers,
Are those that commonly adorn the house,
I think I have besides, as fair as civil•
Or any town in Spain can parallel.
Now if she be not married, I have some hopes,
Are you a maid?
You make me blush to answer,
I ever was accounted so to this hour,
And that's the reason that I live retired sir.
Then would I counsel you to marry presently,
If I can get her, I am made for ever,
For every year you loose, you loose a beauty,
A husband now an honest careful husband,
Were such a comfort, will ye walk above stairs.
This place will fit our talk, tic fitter far sir,
Above there are day-beds, and such temptations
I dare not trust sir.
She is excellent wise withal too.
You named a husband, I am not so strict sir,
Nor ti'de unto a Virgins solitariness,
But if an honest, and a noble one,
Rich, and a soldier, for so I have vowed he shall be,
Were offered me, I think I should accept him,
But above all he must love.
He were base else,
There's comfort ministered in the word soldier,
How sweetly should I live.
I am not so ignorant, but that I know well,
How to be commanded,
And how again to make my self obeyed sir,
I wast but little, I have gathered much,
My real not the less worth, when tic spent,
If spent by my direction, to please my husband,
I hold it as indifferent in my duty,
To be his maid in the kitchen, or his Cook,
As in the Hall to know my self the Mistress.
Sweet, Rich, and provident, now fortune stick
To me; I am a soldier, and a bachelor, Lady,
And such a wife as you, I cood love infinitely,
They that use many words, some are deceitful,
I long to be a husband, and a good one,
For tic most certain I shall make a president
For all that follow me to love their Ladies,
I am young you see, able I would have you think too,
If it please you know, try me before you take me,
It is true I shall not meet in equal wealth
With ye, but Jewels, Chains, such as the war
Has given me, a thousand ducats I dare
Presume on in ready gold, now as your
Care may handle it, as rich cloths too, as
Any he bears arms Lady.
You are a true gentleman, and fair, I see by ye,
And such a man I had rather take.
Pray doe so, isle have a Priest of the sudden.
And as suddenly you will repent too.
Isle be hanged or drowned first,
By this and this, and this kiss.
You are a Flatterer,
But I must say there was something when • saw you.
First, in that most noble face, that stirred my fancy.
Isle stir it better ere you sleep sweet Lady,
Isle send for all my trunks and give up all to ye,
Into your own dispose, before I bed ye,
And then sweet wench.
You have the art to cozen me.
Sit down and give me your opinions seriously.
You say you have a mind to marry Lady.
Tic true, I have for to preserve my credit,
Yet not so much for that as for my state Ladies,
Conceive me right, there lies the maine of the question,
Credit I can redeem, money will imp it,
But when my monie's gone, when the law shall
Cease that, and for incontinence strip me
Of all.
Doe you find your body so malicious that way.
I find it as all bodies are that are young and lusty,
Lazy, and high fed, I desire my pleasure•
And pleasure I must have.
It is fit you should have,
Your years require it, and it is necessary,
As necessary as meat to a young Lady,
Sleep cannot nourish more.
But might not all this be, &amp; keep ye single.
You take away variety in marriage,
The abundance of the pleasure you are bared then,
I'st not abundance that you aim at.
Yes why was I made a woman.
And every day a new?
Why fair and young but to use it.
You are still in the right, why would you marry then.
Because a husband stops all doubts in this point,
And clears all passages.
What husband mean ye.
A husband of an ea•y faith a fool,
Made by her wealth, and moulded to her pleasure,
One though he see himself become a monster,
Shall hold the door, and entertain the maker.
You grant there may be such a man.
Yes marry, but how to bring um to this rare Perfection.
They must be chosen so, things of no honour,
Nor outward honesty.
No it is no matter,
I care not what they are, so they be lusty.
Me thinks now a rich Lawyer, some such fellow,
That carries credit, and a face of awe,
But lies with nothing but his clients business.
No ther's no trusting them, they are too subtle,
The Law has moulded um of natural mischief.
Then some grave governo•,
Some man of honour, yet an easy man.
If he have honour I am undone, isle none such,
Isle have a lusty man, honour will cloy me.
Tic fit ye should Lady;
And to that end, with search and wit and labour,
I have found one out, a right one and a perfect,
He is made as strong as brass, is of brave years too,
And doubty of complexion.
Is he a Gentleman?
Yes and a So•ldier, as gentle as you would wish him,
A good fellow, wears good clothes.
Those isle allow him,
They are for my credit, does he understand,
But little?
Very little.
Tic the better.
Has not the war•es •red him up to anger?
No, he will not quarrel with a dog that bites him,
Let him be drunk or sober, is one silence.
Has no capacity what honour is?
For that's the soldiers god.
Honor's a thing too subtle for his wisdom•
If honour lye in eating, he is right honourable.
Is he so goodly a man doe you say?
As you shall see Lady,
But to all this is but a trunk.
I would have him so,
I shall add branches to him to adorn him,
Go, find me out this man, and le• me see him,
If he be that motion that you tell me of,
And make no more noise, I shall entertain him,
Let him be here.
He shall attend your Ladyship.
Why thou art not married indeed.
No, no, pray think so,
Alas I am a fellow of no reckoning,
Not worth a Ladies eye.
Woodst thou steal a fortune,
And make none of all thy friends acquainted with it•
Nor bid us to thy wedding.
No indeed,
There was no wisdom in it, to bid an Artist,
An old seducer to a female banquet,
I can cut up my pie without your instructions.
Was it the wench in the veil.
Basto it was she,
The prettiest rogue that ere you looked upon,
The lovingst thief.
And is she rich withal too.
A mine, a mine, there is no end of wealth Coronell.
I am an ass, a bashful fool, prithee Coronell,
How doe thy companies fill now.
You are merry sir,
You intend a safer war at home belike now.
I doe not think I shall fight much this year Coro∣nil,
I find my self given to my ease a little,
I care not if I sell my foolish company,
They are things of hazard.
How it angers me,
This fellow at first sight should win a Lady,
A rich young wench, and I that have consumed
My time and art in searching out their subtleties,
Like a fooled Alchemist blow up my hopes still,
When shall we come to thy house and be freely merry.
When I have managed his a little more,
I have a house to entertain an army.
If thy wife be fair, thou wilt have few less
Come to thee.
But where they'll get entertainment is the point Senior.
I beat no drum.
You need none but her taber,
May be isle march after a month or two,
To get me a fresh stomach, I find Coronell
A wantonness in wealth, methinks I agree not with,
Tic such a trouble to be married too,
And have a thousand things of great importance,
Jewels and plates, and fooleries molest me,
To have a mans brains whimsied with his wealth:
Before I walked contentedly.
My Mistress sir is sick, because you are absent,
She mourns and will not eat.
Alas my Jewel,
Come isle go with thee, gentlemen your fair leaves,
You see I am tide a little to my yoke,
Pray pardon me, would ye had both such loving wives.
I thank ye
For your old boots, never be blank Alonzo,
Because this fellow has out stripped thy fortune,
Tell me ten days hence what he is, and how
The gracious state of matrimony stands with him,
Come, lets to dinner, when Margarita comes
We'll visit both, it may be then your fortune.
Is he come?
Yes Madame, has been here this half hour,
I have questioned him of all that you can ask him,
And find him as fit as you had made the man,
He will make the goodliest shadow for iniquity.
Have ye searched him Ladies?
Is a man at all points, a likely man.
Call him in Altea.
A man of a good presence, pray ye come this way,
Of a lusty body, is his mind so•am.
Pray ye question him, and if you find him not
Fit for your purpose, shake him off, there's no harm Done.
Can you love a young Lady? How he blushes.
Leave twirling of your hat, &amp; hold your head up,
And speak to'th Lady.
Yes, I think I can,
I must be taught, I know not what it means Madam.
You shall be taught, and can you when she pleases
Go ride abroad, and stay a week or two?
You shall have men and horses to attend ye,
And money in your purse.
Yes I love riding,
And when I am from home I am so merry.
Be as merry as you will: can you as handsomely
When you are sent for back, come with obedience,
And doe your duty to the Lady loves you?
Yes sure, I shall.
And when you see her friends here,
Or noble kinsmen, can you entertain
Their servants in the Cellar, and be busied,
And hold your peace, what ere you see or hear of.
It were fit I were hanged else.
Let me try your kisses,
How the fool shakes, I will not eat ye sir,
Beshrew my heart he kisses wondrous manly,
Can ye doe any thing else?
Indeed I know not;
But if your Ladyship will please to instruct me,
Sure I shall learn.
You shall then be instructed;
If I should be this Lady that affects ye,
Nay say I marry ye?
Hark to the Lady.
What money have ye?
None Madam, nor friends,
I wood doe any thing to serve your Ladyship.
You must not look to be my Mr Sir,
Nor talk ith house as though you wore the breeches,
No, nor command in any thing.
I will not.
Alas I am not able, I have no wit Madam.
Nor doe not labour to arrive at any,
Twill spoil your head I take ye upon charity•
And like a servant ye must be unto me,
As I behold your duty I shall love ye,
And as you observe me, I may chance lye with ye,
Can you mark these.
Yes indeed forsooth.
There is one thing,
That if I take ye in I put ye from me,
Utterly from me, you must not be saucy,
No, nor at any time familiar with me,
Scarce know me, when I call ye not.
J will not, alas I never knew my self sufficiently.
Nor must not now.
Isle be a dog to please ye.
Indeed you must fetch and carry as I appoint ye.
I were too •lame else.
Kiss me ag•n; a strong fellow,
There is a vigour in his lips: if you see me
Kiss any other, twenty in an hour sir,
You must not start, nor be offended.
No, if you kiss a thousand I shall be contented,
It will the better teach me how to please ye.
I told ye Madam,
Tic the man I wished for; the less you speak.
Isle never speak again Madam,
But when you charge me, then isle speak softly too.
Get me a Priest, isle wed him instantly,
But when you are married sir, you must wait
Upon me, and see you observe my laws.
Else you shall hang me.
Isle give ye better clothes when you deserve um,
Come in, and serve for witnesses.
We shall Madam.
And then away to'th city presently,
Isle to my new house and new company.
A thousand crowns are thine, &amp; I am a made man.
Doe not break out too soon.
I know my time wench.
What have you caught him?
Yes.
And doe you find him
A man of those hopes that you aimed at?
Yes too,
And the most kind man• and the ablest also
To give a wife content, he is sound as old wine,
And to his soundness rises on the palate,
And there's the man; I find him rich too Clara.
Hast thou married him.
What dost thou think I fish without a bait wench?
I bob for fools? he is mine own I have him,
I told thee what would tickle him like a trout,
And as I cast it so I caught him daintily,
And all he has I have• stowed at my devotion.
Does thy Lady know this? she is coming now to town,
Now to live here in this house.
Let her come,
She shall be welcome, I am prepared for his,
She is mad sure if she be angry at my fortune,
For what I have made bold.
Dost thou not love him?
Yes, entirely well,
As long as there he stays and looks no farther
Into my ends, but when he doubts, I hate him,
And that wise hate will teach me how to cozen him,
How to decline their wives, and curb their manners,
To put a sterne and strong reyne to their natures,
And holds he is an Ass not worth acquaintance,
That cannot mould a devil to obedience,
I owe him a good turn for these opinions,
And as I find his temper I may pay him.
O here he is, now you shall see a kind man.
My Estifania, shall we to dinner lamb,
I know thou staist for me.
I cannot eat else.
I never enter but me thinks a Paradise
Appears about me.
You are welcome to it Sir.
I think I have the sweetest seat in Spain wench,
Me thinks the richest too, weal eat ith garden
In one of the arbours, there tic cool and pleasant,
And have our wine cold in the running fountain
Who's that?
A friend of mine Sir.
Of what breeding?
A Gentlewoman Sir.
What business has she?
Is she a learned woman in the Mathematics,
Can she tell fortunes?
More then I know Sir.
Or has she ere a letter from a kinswoman,
That must be delivered in my absence wife,
Or comes she from the Doctor to salute ye,
And learn your health, she looks not like a confessor.
What need all this, why are you troubled Sir.
What doe you suspect, she cannot •uckold ye,
She is a woman Sir, a very woman.
Your very woman may doe very well Sir
Toward the matter, for though she cannot perform it
In her own person, she may doe it by Proxy,
Your rarest jugglers work still by conspiracy.
Cry ye mercy husband, you are jealous then,
And happily suspect me.
No indeed wife.
Me thinks you should not till you have more cause
And clearer too: I am sure you have heard say husband,
A woman forced will free her self through iron,
A happy, calm, and good wife discontented
May be taught tricks.
No, no, I doe but jest with ye.
To morrow friend isle see you.
I shall leave ye
Till then, and pray all may go sweetly with ye.
Why whore's this girl, whose at the door.
Who knocks there?
Is it for the king ye come, you knock so boisterously?
Look to the door.
My Lady, as I live Mistress, my Laddie's come,
Shoe's at the door, I peeped through, &amp; I saw her,
And a stately company of Ladies with her.
This was a week too soon, but I must meet with her,
And set a new wheel going, and a subtle one,
Must blind this mighty Mars, or I am ruined.
What are they at door?
Such my Michael
As you may bless•e the day they entered here,
Such for our good.
Tic well.
Nay, twill be better
If you will let me but dispose the business,
And be a stranger to it, and not disturb me,
What have I now to doe but to advance your fortune.
Doe, I dare trust thee, I am ashamed I am angry,
I find thee a wise young wife.
Isle wise your worship
Before I leave ye, pray ye walk by and say nothing,
Only salute him, and leave the rest to me Sir,
I was borne to make ye a man.
The rogue speaks heartily,
Her good will colours in her cheeks, I am borne to love her.
I must be gentler to these tender natures,
A soldiers rude harsh words befit not Ladies,
Nor must we talk to them as we talk to
Our Officers, isle give her way, for tic for me she
Works now, I am husband, heir, and all she has.
Who are these, what •lanting things, a woman
Of rare presence, excellent fair, this is too big
For a bawdy house, too open seated too.
My husband Lady.
You have gained a proper man.
What ere I am, I am your servant Lady.
Sir, be ruled now,
And I shall make ye rich, this is my cozen,
That Gentleman dotes on her, even to death, see how he obe∣serves her.
She is a goodly woman.
She is a mirror,
But she is poor, she were for a Princes side else,
This house she has brought him too as to his own,
And presuming upon me, and upon my courtesy,
Conceive me short, he knows not but she is wealthy,
Or if she did know otherwise, it were all one,
He is so far gone.
Forward, she has a rare face.
This we must carry with discretion husband,
And yield unto her for four days.
Yield our house up, our goods and wealth.
All this is but in seeming
To milk the lover on, doe you see this writing,
200 a year when they are married,
Has she sealed too for our good; the time's unfit now,
Isle show it you to morrow.
All the house.
All, all, and weal remove too, to confirm him.
They'll into 'th country suddenly again
After they are matched, and then sheele open to him.
The whole possession wife, look what you doe,
A part of the house.
No, no, they shall have all,
And take their pleasure too, tic •or our 'vantage,
Why, whats four days, had you a sister sir,
A Niece or Mistress that required this courtesy,
And should I make a •cruple to doe you good?
If easily it would come back.
I swear Sir,
As easily as it came on, first not pity
To let such a Gentlewoman for a little help,
You give away no house.
Clear but that question.
Isle put the writings into your hand.
Well then.
And you shall keep them safe.
I am satisfied; wood I had the wench so too•
When she has mar•ed him,
So infinite his love is linked unto his,
You, I, or any one that helps at this pinch
May have heaven knows what.
Isle remove the goods straight,
And take some poor house by, tic but for four days.
I have a poor old friend; there weal be.
Tic well then.
Go handsome off, and leave the house clear.
Well.
That little stuff weal use shall follow after;
And a boy to guide ye, peace and we are made both.
Come, let's go in, are all the rooms kept sweet wench.
They are sweet and neat.
Why whore's your husband?
Gone Madam.
When you come to your own he must give place Lady.
Well, send you joy, you would not let me know•t,
Yet I shall not forget ye.
Thank your Ladyship.
Are you at ease now, is your heart at rest,
Now you have got a shadow, an umbrella
To keep the scorching worlds opinion
From your fair credit.
I am at peace Altea.
If he continue but the same he shows,
And be a master of that ignorance
He outwardly professes, I am happy,
The pleasure I shall live in and the freedom
Without the squint-eye of the law upon me,
Or prating liberty of tongues, that envy.
You are a made woman.
But if he should prove now
A crafty and dissembling kind of husband,
One read in knavery, and brought up in the art
Of villainy concealed.
My life, an Innocent.
That's it I aim at,
That's it I hope too, then I am sure I rule him,
For Innocents are like obedient children
Brought up under a hard mother in law, a cruel,
Who being not used to break-fasts &amp; collations,
When they have course bread offered um, are thankful,
And take it for a favour too, are the rooms
Made ready to entertain my friends, I long to dance now
And to be wanton; let me have a song, is the great couch up,
The Duke of Medina sent?
Tic up and ready.
And day beds in all chambers?
In all Lady,
Your house is nothing now but various pleasures
The Gallants begin to gaze too.
Let um gaze on,
I was brought up a Courtier, high and happy,
And company is my delight, and courtship,
And handsome servants at my will, whore's my good husband•
Where does he wait?
He knows his distance Madam,
I warrant ye, he is busy in the cellar
Amongst his fellow servants, or asleep,
Till your command awake him.
Tic well Altea.
It should be so, my ward I must preserve him,
Who sent for him, how dare he come uncalled for,
His bonnet on too.
Sure he sees you not.
How scornfully he looks.
Are all the chambers
Decked and adorned thus for my Ladies pleasure,
New hangings every hour for entertainment•
And new plate bought, new jewels to give lustre.
They are, and yet there must be more and richer,
It is her will.
Hum, is it so, tic excellent,
It is her will too, to have feasts and banquets,
Revels and masques•
She ever loved um dearly,
And we shall have the bravest housekept n•w sir,
I must not call ye master she has warned me•
Nor must not put my hat off to ye.
Tic no fashion,
What though I be his husband, I am your fellow,
I may cut first.
That's as you shall this•ve sir.
And when I lye with her.
May be isle light ye.
On the same point you may doe me that service.
Madame, the Duke Medina with some captains
Will come to dinner, and have •en• are wine,
And their best services.
They shall be welcome,
See all be ready in the noblest fashion,
The house perfumed, now I shall take my pleasure,
And not my neighbour Justice maund• at me,
Go, get your best cloths on, but till I call ye,
Be sure you be not seen, dine with the gen•lewomen,
And behave your self cleanly sir, tic for my credit.
Madame, the Lady Iulia.
That's a bawd,
A three pild bawd, bawd major to the army.
Ha• brought her coach to wait upon your Ladyship,
And to be informed if you will take the air• this morning.
The neat air of his nunnery.
Tell her no, in the afternoon Isle call on his.
I will Madame.
Why are not you gone to prepare your self,
May be you shall be sewer to the first course,
A portly presence, Alten he looks lean,
Tic a wash knave, he will not keep his flesh well.
A willing, madame• one that needs no spurring.
Faith madame, in my little understanding,
You had better entertain your honest neighbours•
Your friends about ye, that may speak well of ye,
And give a worthy m•ntion of yo•r bounty.
How now what's this?
Tic only to persuade ye,
Courtiers are but tickle things to deal withal,
A kind of march-pane men that will not last Madame,
An egg and pepper goes farther then their potions,
And in a well built body• a poor parsnip
Will play his prize, above their strong potabiles.
The fellows mad.
H• that shall counsel Ladies,
That have both licorish and ambitious eyes,
I• either •ad, or d•unke, let him speak Gospel.
He breaks out modestly.
Pray ye be not angry,
My indiscretion has made bold to tell ye,
What you'll find true.
Thou dare not •alke.
Not much Madame,
You have a tie upon your servants tongue,
He dares not be so bold as reason bids him,
It were fit there were a stronger on your temper,
Ne'er look so sterne upon me I am your husband,
But what are husbands, read the new worlds wonders,
Such husbands as this monstrous world produces,
And you will scarce find such deformities,
They are shadows to conceal your venial virtues,
Sails to your mills, th•t grind with all occasions,
Balls that lye by you, to wash out your staines,
And bills naild up with horn before your stories,
To rent out last.
Doe you hear him talk?
I have done Madame,
An ox once spoke, as learned men deliver,
Shortly I shall be such, then Isle speak wonders,
Till when I tie my self to my obedience.
First isle untie my self, did you mark the Gentlemā,
How boldly and how saucily he talked,
And how unlike the lump I took him for,
The piece of ignorant dow, he stood up to me
And mated my commands, this was your providence,
Your wisdom, to elect this gentleman,
Your excellent forecast in the man, your knowledge,
What think ye now.
I think him an ass still,
This boldness some of your people have blown
Into him, this wisdom too with strong wine,
It is a Tyrant, and a Philosopher also, and finds
Out reasons.
Isle have my cellar locked, no school kept there•
Nor no discovery• Isle t•rne my drunkards,
Such as are understanding in their draughts,
And dispute learnedly the whys and wherefores,
To grass immediately, Isle keep all fool•s,
Sober or drunk, still fools• that shall know nothing,
Nothing belongs to mankind, but obedie•ce,
And such a hand isle keep over this husband.
He will fall again, my life he eryes •y this time,
Keep him from drink, he has a hye constitution.
Shall I wear my new su•e Madame?
No your old clothes•
And get you into the country presently,
And see my hawks well trained, you shall have victuals,
Such as are fit for saucy palates sir,
And lodgings with the hinds it is to good too.
Good madame be not so rough, with repent••e,
You see now he's come roun'd again.
I see not what I expect to see.
You shall see Madame, if it shall please your Lady∣ship.
Hoe's humbled,
Forgive good Lady.
Well go get you handsome,
And let me hear no more.
Have ye yet no feeling,
Isle pinch ye to the bones then my proud Lady.
See you preserve him thus upon my favour,
You know his temper, tie him to the grindstone,
The next rebellion Isle be rid of him,
Isle have no needy rascals, I tie to me,
Dispute my life, come in and see all handsome.
I hope to see you so too, I have wrought ill else.
Shall I never return to mine own house again,
We are lodged here in the miserablest dog-hole,
A conjurers circle gives content above it,
A hawks mew is a princely palace to it,
We have a bed no bigger then a basket,
And there we lye like butter clapped together,
And sweat our selves to sawee immediately,
The fumes are Infinite inhabit here too;
And to that so thick, they c•t like marmalette,
So various too, they'll pose a gold finder,
Never return to mine own paradise?
Why wife I say, why Estifa•in.
I am going presently.
Make hast good jewel,
I am like the people that live in the sweet Lands:
I dye I dye if I stay but one day more here,
My lungs are rotten with the damps that rise,
And I cough nothing now but stinks of all sorts,
The inhabitants we have are two starved rats,
For they are not able to maintain a cat here,
And those appear as fearful as two devils,
They have eat a map of the whole world up already,
And if we stay a night we are gone for company,
Ther's an old woman that's now grown to marble,
Dri'd in this brick hill, and she sits in the chimney,
Which is but three tiles raised like a house of cards,
The true proportion of an old smoked Sibill,
There is a young thing too that nature meant
For a maid servant, but tic now a monster,
She has a husk about his like a chestnut
With baseness, and living under the line here,
And these two make a hollow sound together,
Like frogs or winds between two doors that murmur•
Mercy deliver me, o are you come wife,
Shall we be free again.
I am now going,
And you shall presently to your own house sir,
The remembrance of this small vexation,
Will be argument of mirth for ever:
By that time you have said your orisons,
And broke your fast, I shall be back and ready,
To usher you to your old content, your freedom.
Break my neck rather, is there any thing here to eat
But one another, like a race of Cannibals,
A piece of buttered wall you think is excellent,
Let's have our house again immediately,
And pray ye take heed unto the furniture,
None be imbesseld.
Not a pin I warrant ye.
And let um instantly depart.
They shall both,
There's reason in all courtesies they must both,
For by this time I know she has acquainted him,
And has provided too she sent me word sit,
And will give over gratefully unto you.
Isle walk in the Church-yard,
The dead cannot offend more then these living,
An hour hence Isle expect ye.
Isle not fail sir.
And doe you hear, let's have a handsome dinner,
And see all things be decent as they have been,
And let me have a strong bath to restore me,
I stink like a stall-fish shambles, or an oil shop.
You shall have all, which some interpret nothing,
Isle send ye people for the trunks before hand,
And for the s•uffe.
Let um be known and honest,
And doe my service to your niece.
I shall sir,
But if I come not at my hour come thither,
That they may give you thanks for your fair courtesy,
And pray ye be brave for my sake.
I observe ye.
Thou art very brave.
I have reason, I have money.
Is money reason.
Yes and ruin too Captain,
If ye have no money you're an ass.
I thank ye.
Ye have meaner, ever thank him that has money.
Wilt thou lend me any?
Not a far thing Captain,
Captains are casual things.
Why so are all men, thou shalt have my bond.
Nor bonds nor fetters Captain,
My money is mine own, I make no doubt on it.
What dost thou doe with it?
Put it to pious uses,
Buy wine and wenches, and undo young coxcombs,
That would undo me.
Are those hospitals?
I first provide to fill my hospitals,
With creatures of mine own that I know wretched,
And then I build, those are more bound to pray for me,
Besides I keep th'inheritance in my name still.
A provident charity, are you for the wars sir?
I am not poor enough to be soldier,
Nor have I faith enough to ward a bullet.
This is no lineing for a trench I take it.
Ye have said wisely.
Had you but my money,
You would swear it Coronell, I had rather drill at home,
A hundred thousand crowns, and with more honour,
Then exercise ten thousand fools with nothing,
A Wise man safely feeds, fools cut their fingers.
A right state-usurer, why dost thou not marry,
And live a reverend Justice.
Is it not nobler to command a reverent Justice, then to be one,
And for a wife, what need I marry Captain,
When every courteous fool, that owes me money.
Owes me his wife too, to appease my fury.
Wilt thou go to dinner with us.
I will go, and view the pearl of Spain, the orient
Fair one, the rich one too, and I will be respected,
I bear my patent here, I will talk to her,
And when your Captains ships shall stand a loose,
And pick your noses, I will pick the purse,
Of his affection.
The Duke dines there to day too, the Duke of Me∣dina.
Let the King dine there,
He owes me money, and so farre's my creature,
And certainly I may make bold with mine own Captain.
Thou wilt eat monstrously.
Like a true borne Spaniard,
Eat as I were in England where the beef grows,
And I will drink abundantly and then,
Talk ye as wantonly as Ovid did,
To stir the intellectuals of the Ladies,
I learnt it of my Fathers amorous Scrivener.
If we should play now, you must supply me.
You must pawn a horse troop,
And then have at ye Coronell.
Come let's go.
This rascal will make rare sport, how the Ladies
Will laugh him, leave ager.
If I light on him isle make his purse sweat too.
Will ye lead gentlemen.
Nay pray ye come out, and let me understand ye,
And tune your pipe a little higher Lady,
Isle hold ye fast: rub, how came my trunks open,
And my goods gone, what picklock spirit.
Ha what would ye have?
My goods again, how came my trunks all open.
Are your trunks open?
Yes and cloths gone,
And chains, and Jewels, how she smells like hung bee•e,
The palsy and picklocks, fie how she belches,
The spirit of garlic.
Whore's your gentlewoman?
The young fair woman.
What's that to my question,
She is my wife: and gone about my business.
Is she your wife sir.
Yes sir, is that wonder;
Is the name of wife unknown here.
Is she truly, truly your wife.
I think so for I married her,
It was no vision sure.
She has the keys sir,
I know she has, but who has all my goods spirit.
If you be married to that Gentlewoman,
You are a wretched man, she has twenty husbands.
She tells you true.
And she has consent all sir.
The Devil she has, I had a fair house with her,
That stands hard by, and furnished royally.
You are consent too, tic none of hers good gentle∣man,
It is a Ladies, what's the Ladies name wench.
The Lady Margarita, she was her servant
And kept the house, but going from her sir,
For some lewd tricks she plaid.
Plague a the Devil,
Am I in the full Meridian of my wisdom
Cheated by a stale queen, what kind of Lady
Is that that owes the house?
A young sweet Lady.
Of a low stature?
She is indeed but little, but she is wondrous fair•
I feel I am consent.
Now I am sensible I am undone,
This is the very woman sure, that cozen
She told me would entreat but for four days,
To make the house hers, I am entreated sweetly.
When she went out this morning, that I saw Sir,
She had two women at the door attending,
And there she gave um things, and loaded um,
But what they were, I heard your trunks to open,
If they be yours.
They were mine while they are laden,
But now they have cast their calves, they are not worth
Owning, was she his Mistress say you?
Her own Mistress, her very Mistress, Sir, and all you saw
About, and in that house was hers.
No plate, no jewels, nor no hangings?
Not a farthing, she is poor, sir, a poor shifting thing,
No money?
Abominable poor, as poor as we are,
Money as rare to her unless she steal it.
But for one civil gown his Lady gave his,
She may go bare good Gentlewoman.
I am mad now,
I think I am as poor as she, I am wide else,
One civil suit I have left too, and that's all,
And if she steal that she must flea me for it,
Where does she use?
You may find truth as soon,
Alas a thousand concealed corners sir, she lurks in,
And here she gets a fleece, and there another,
And lives in mists and smokes where none can find her.
Is she a whore too?
Little better Gentleman, I dare not say she is so sir, because
She is yours, sir, but these 5 years she has firkt
A pretty living,
Until she came to serve; I fear he will knock my
Brains out for lying.
She has served me faithfully,
A whore, and a thief, two excellent moral learnings
In one she Saint, I hope to see her legend.
Have I been feared for my discoveries,
And courted by all women to conceal um,
Have I so long studied the art of this sex,
And read the warnings to young Gentlemen:
Have I professed to tame the pride of Ladies,
And make um bear all tests, and am I tricked now,
Caught in mine own noose, here's a royal left yet,
Theres for your lodging and your meat for this week.
A silkworm lives at a more plentiful ordinary,
And sleeps in a sweeter box, farewell great grandmother,
If I doe find you were an accessory,
Tic but the cutting off too smokey minutes.
Isle hang ye presently.
And I deserve it, I tell but truth.
Nor I, I am an ass mother.
A goodly house.
And richly furnished too Sir.
Hung wantonly, I like that preparation,
It stirs the blood unto a hopeful banquet,
And intimates the Mistress free and jovial,
I love a house where pleasure prepares welcome.
Now Cacafogo, how like you this mansion,
It were a brave pawn.
I shall be master of it,
It was built for my bulk, the rooms are wide and spacious,
Aerie, and full of ease, and that I love well,
Isle tell you when I taste the wine my Lord,
And take the height of his table with my stomach,
How my affections stand to the young Lady.
All welcome to your Grace, and to these soldiers,
You honour my poor house with your fair presence•
Those few slight pleasures that inhabit here sir,
I doe beseech your Grace command, they are yours;
Your servant but preserves um to delight ye,
I thank ye Lady, I am bold to visit ye.
Once more to bless mine eyes with your sweet beauty,
Tas been a long night since you left the Court,
For till I saw you now, no day broke to me.
Bring in the Dukes meat.
She is most excellent.
Most admirable fair as ere I looked on,
I had rather command her then my regiment.
Isle have a fling, tic but a thousand Ducats,
Which I can cozen up again in ten days,
And some few jewels to justify my knavery,
Say J should marry her, sheele get more money
Then all my usury, put my knavery to it,
She appears the most infallible way of purchase,
I cood wish her a size or two stronger, for the encounter,
For I am like a Lyon where I lay hold,
But these Lambs will endure a plague load,
And never bleat neither, that sir, time has taught us.
I am so virtuous now, I cannot speak to her,
The arrant'st shame faced a•se, I broil away too.
Why whore's this dinner?
Tic not ready Madam,
Nor shall not be until I know the guests too,
Nor are they fairly welcome till I bid um.
Is not this my Alferese he looks another thing,•
Are miracles a foot again?
Why sir, why sir you.
I hear you saucy woman,
And as you are my wife command your absence,
And know your duty, tic the crown of modesty.
Your wife?
Yes good my Lord, I am her husband,
And pray take notice that I claim that honour,
And will maintain it.
If thou be her husband,
I am determined thou shall be my Cuckold,
Isle be thy faithful friend.
Peace dirt and dunghill,
I will not loose my anger on a rascal,
Provoke me more, isle beat thy blown body
Till thou reboundst again like a Tennis ball.
This is miraculous.
Is this the fellow
That had the patience to become a fool,
A flurted fool, and on a sudden break,
As if he would •hew a wonder to the world•
Both into bravery, and fortune too,
I much admire the man, J am astonished.
Isle be divorced immediately
You shall not.
You shall not have so much will to be wicked.
I am more tender of your honour Lady,
And of your age, you took me for a shadow.
You took me to gloss over your discr•dit,
To be your fool, you had thought you had found a coxcomb;
I am innocent of any foul dishonour I mean to ye,
Only I will be known to be your Lord now,
And be a fair one too, or I will fall for it.
I doe command ye from me thou poor fellow,
Thou cozened fool.
Thou cozened fool, tic not so,
I will not be commanded: I am above ye:
You may divorce me from your favour Lady,
But from your state you never shall, isle hold that,
And hold it to my use, the law allows it,
And then maintain your wantonness Isle wink at it.
Am I braved thus in mine own house.
Tic mine Madam,
You are deceived I am Lord of it, I rule it and all that's in it,
You have nothing to doe here Madam,
But as a servant to sweep clean the lodgings,
And at my farther will to doe me service,
And so isle keep it.
As you love me give way.
It shall be better,
I will give none Madame,
I stand upon the ground of mine own honour
And will maintain it, you shall know me now,
To be an understanding feeling man,
And sensible of what a woman aims at,
A young proud woman that has will to sail with,
An itching woman, that her blood provokes too,
I cast my cloud off and appear my self,
The master of this little piece of mischief,
And I will put a spell about your feet Lady,
They shall not wander but where I give way now.
Is this the fellow that the people pointed at,
For the mere sign of man, the walking image,
He speaks wondrous highly.
As a husband ought sir,
In his own house, and it becomes me well too,
I think your grace would grieve if you were put to it,
To have a wife or servant of your own,
For wives are reckoned in the rank of servants,
Under your own roof to command ye.
Brave, a strange convertion, thou shalt lead
In chief now.
Is there no difference betwixt his and you sir.
Not now Lord, my Fortune makes me even,
And as I am an honest man, I am nobler.
Get me my coach.
Let me see who dare get it
Till I command, isle make him draw your coach too,
And eat your Coach, (which will be hard diet)
That executes your will; or take your coach Lady,
I give you liberty, and take your people.
Which I turn off, and take your will abroad with ye,
Take all these freely, but take me no more,
And so farewell.
Nay sir you shall not carry it
So bravely off, you shall not wrong a Lady
In a high huffing strain, and think to bear it,
We stand not by as bawds to your brave fury,
To see a Lady weep.
They are tears of anger, I beseech ye note um not worth pity,
Wrung from her rage, because her will prevails not,
She would sound now if she could not cry,
Else they were excellent and I should grieve too,
But falling thus, they show nor sweet nor orient,
Put up my Lord, this is oppression,
And calls the sword of Justice to relieve me,
The Law to lend her hand, the king to right me,
All which shall understand how you provoke me,
In mine own house to brave me, is this princely,
Then to my guard, and if I spare your Grace,
And doe not make this place your monument,
Too rich a tomb for such a rude behaviour,
I have a cause will kill a thousand of ye, mercy for sake me.
Hold fair sir I beseech ye,
The Gentleman but pleads his own right nobly.
He that dares strike against the husbands freedom,
The husbands curse stick to him, a tamed cuckold,
His wife be fair and young, but most dishonest,
Most impudent, and have no feeling of it,
No conscience to reclaim her from a Monster,
Let her lye by him like a flattering ruin,
And at one instant kill both name and honour,
Let him be lost, no eye to weep his end,
Nor find no earth that's base enough to bury him,
Now sir fall on, I am ready to oppose ye.
I have better thought, I pray sir use your wife well.
Mine own humanity will teach me that sir,
And now you are all welcome, all, and we'll to dinner,
This is my wedding day.
Isle cross your joy yet.
I have seen a miracle, hold thine own soldier,
Sure they dare fight in fire that conquer women.
Has beaten all my loose thoughts out of me,
As if he had thresh•um out of the husk.
Save ye, which is the Lady of the house.
That's she sir, that pretty Lady,
If you would speak with her.
Don Michael Leon, another direr come?
Pray doe not know me, I am full of business,
When I have more time isle be merry with ye,
It is the woman, good Madame tell me truly,
Had you a maid called Estifania?
Yes truly had I.
Was she a maid doe you think?
I dare not swear for her,
For she had but a scant fame.
Was she your kinse-woman?
Not that I ever knew, now I look better
I think you married her, give you much joy sir,
You may reclaim her it was a wild young girl.
Give me a halter, is not this house mine Madame•
Was not she owner of it, pray speak truly.
No, certainly, I am sure my money paid for it,
And I ne'er remember yet I gave it you sir.
The hangings and the plate too?
All are mine sir,
And every thing you see about the building,
She only kept my house when I was absent,
And so ill kept it, I was weary of her.
What a Devil ails hee?
Is possessed isle assure you.
Where is your maid?
Doe not you know that have her?
She is yours now, why should I look after his,
Since that first hour I came I never saw her.
I saw her later would the Devil had had her,
It is all true I find, a wild-fire take her•
Is thy wife with child Don Michael? thy excellent wife.
Art thou a man yet.
When shall we come and visit thee?
And eat some rare fruit, thou •ast admirable Or∣chards,
You are so jealous now, pox a your jealousy,
How scurvily you look.
Pre thee leave fooling,
I am in no humour now to fool and prattle,
Did she ne'er play the wag with you.
Yes many times, so often that I was ashamed to keep her,
But I forgave her sir, in hope she would mend still,
And had not you of the instant married her,
I had put her off.
I thank ye I am blessed still,
Which way so ere I turn I am a made man,
Miserably gulled beyond recovery.
You'll stay and dine.
Certain I cannot Captain,
Hark in thine ear, I am the are•ant'st puppy,
The miserablest Ass, but I must leave ye,
I am in hast, in hast, bless ye good madame,
And you prove as good as my wife.
Will you come near sir, will your grace but honour me,
And taste our dinner, you are nobly welcome,
All angers past I hope, and I shall serve ye.
Thou art the stock of men, and I admire thee.
Isle go to a conjurer but isle find this pol-cat,
This pilfring whore, a plague of veils I cry,
And covers for the impudence of women,
Their sanctity in show will deceive Devils,
It is my evil Angel let me bless me.
Tic he, I am caught, I must stand to it stoutly,
And show no shake of fear, I see he is angry,
Vexed at the uttermost.
My worthy wife,
I have been looking of your modesty,
All the town over.
My most noble husband,
I am glad I have found ye, for in truth I am weary,
Weary and lame with looking out your Lordship.
I have been in bawdy houses.
I believe ye, and very lately too.
Pray ye pardon me,
To seek your Ladyship, I have been in cell•rs,
In private cellars, where the thirsty bawds
Hear your confessions; I have been at plays,
To look you out amongst the youthful actors,
At Puppet shows, you are Mistress of the motions;
At gosshippings I hearkened after ye,
But amongst those confusions of lewd tongues
There's no distinguishing beyond a Babel.
I was amongst the Nuns because you sing well,
But they say yours are bawdy songs, they mourn for ye,
And last I went to Church to seek you out,
Tic so loug since you were there, they have forgot ye.
You have had a pretty progress, isle tell mine now
To look you out, I went to twenty Taverns.
And are you sober?
Yes, I reel not yet sir,
Where I saw twenty drunk most of em soldiers,
There I had great hope to find you disguised too.
From hence to'th dicing house, there I found
Quarrels needless, and senseless, swords, and pots, and can∣dlesticks,
Tables, and stools, and all in one confusion,
And no man knew his friend, I left this Chaos,
And to the Surgeons went, he wi•lt me stay,
For says he learnedly, if he be tippled,
Twenty to one he whores, and then I bear of him.
If he be mad, he quarrels, then he comes •oo,
I sought ye where no safe thing would have ventured
Amongst diseases, base, and wild, wild women,
For I remembered your old Roman axiom,
The more the danger, still the more the honour.
Last to your Confessor I came, who told me
Yo• were too proud to pray, and here I have found ye.
She bears up bravely and the rogue is witty,
But I shall dash it instantly to nothing,
Here leave we off our wanton languages,
And now conclude we in a sharper tongue.
Why am I consent,
Why am I abused.
Thou most wild, base, abominable.
Captain.
Thou stinking overstewd, poor, po•ky•
Captain.
Doe you Echo me?
Yes Sir, and go before ye,
And round about ye, why doe you rail at me
For that, that was your own sin, your own knavery.
And brave me too.
You had best now draw your sword Captain,
Draw it upon a woman, doe brave Captain,
Upon your wife, oh most renowned Captain.
A plague upon thee, answer me directly,
Why did thou marry me?
To be my husband;
I had thought you had had infinite, but i'm consent.
Why did thou flatter me, and show me wonders,
A house, and riches, when they are but shadows,
Shadows to me.
Why did you work on me,
It was but my part to requite you Sir,
With your strong soldiers wit, and swore you would bring me
So much in chains, so much in jewels husband,
So much in right rich clothes.
Thou hast um rascal•
I gave um to thy hands, my trunks and all;
And thou hast opend um, and sold my treasure.
Sir, Theres your treasure, sell it to a tinker
To mend old kettles, is this noble usage,
Let all the world view here the Captains treasure,
A man would think now these were worthy matters:
Here's a shooing-horne chain, gilt over, how it senteth
Worse then the mouldy dirty heel it served for,
And here is another of a lesser value,
So little, I would shame to tie my dog in it,
These are my joynter, blush and save a labour,
Or these else will blush for ye.
A fire subtle ye, are ye so crafty.
Here is a goodly jewel,
Did not you win this at Goletta Captain,
Or took it in the field from some brave Bashaw,
How it sparkles like an old Ladies eyes,
And fills each room with light like a close lantern,
This would doe rarely in an Abbey window,
To cousin Pilgrims.
Prithee leave prating.
And here's a chain of whitings eyes for pearls,
A mussell-monger would have made a better.
Nay, prithee wife, my clothes, my clothes.
Isle tell ye,
Your clothes are paralells to these, all counter•et.
Put these and them on, you are a man of copper,
A kind of candlestick, these you thought my husband,
To have consent me withal, but I am quit with you.
Is there no house then, nor no grounds about it?
No plate nor hangings?
There are none sweet husband,
Shadow for shadow is an equal justice,
Can you rail now, pray put your fury up sir,
And speak great words, you are a soldier, thunder.
I will speak little, I have plaid the fool,
And so I am rewarded.
You have spoke well sir,
And now I see you are so conformable,
Isle heighthen you again, go to your house,
They are packing to be gone, you must sup there,
Isle meet ye, and bring clothes, and clean shirts after,
And all things shall be well; isle colt ye once more,
And teach ye to bring copper.
Tell me one thing,
I doe beseech thee tell me, tell me truth wife,
However I forgive thee, art thou honest,
The Beldam swore.
I bid her tell you so sir,
It was my plot, alas my credulous husband,
The Lady told you too.
Most strange things of thee.
Still it was my way, and all to try your sufferance,
And she denied the house.
She knew me not;
No, nor no title that I had.
It was well carried;
No more, I am right and straight.
I would believe thee,
But heaven knows how my heart is, will ye follow me.
Isle be there straight.
I am fooled, yet dare not find it.
Go silly fool, thou moist be a good soldier
In open fleld, but for our private service
Thou art an ass, isle make thee so or miss else.
Here comes another Trout that I must tickle,
And tickle daintily, I have lost my end else.
May I crave your leave sir?
Prithee be answered, thou shalt crave no leave,
I am in my meditations, doe not vex me,
A beaten thing, but this hour a most bruised thing,
That people had compassion on, it looked so.
The next Sir Palmerin, here is fine proportion,
An Ass, and then an Elephant, sweet justice,
Theres no way left to come at her now, no craving,
If money could come near, yet I would pay him;
I have a mind to make him a huge cuckold,
And money may doe much, a thousand ducats,
Tic but the letting blood of a rank heir.
Pray ye hear me.
I know thou h•st some wedding ring to pawn now.
Of Silver and guilt with a blind posy in it,
Love and a mill-horse should go round together,
Or thy child's whistle, or thy squirills chain,
Isle none of um, I would she did but know me,
Or would this fellow had but use of money,
That I might come in any way.
I am gone sir,
And I shall tell the beauty sent me to ye,
The Lady Margarita.
Stay I prithee,
What is thy will, I turn me wholly to ye,
And talk now till thy tongue ache, I will hear ye.
She would entreat ye sir.
She shall command sir,
Let it be so I beseech thee my sweet gentlewoman,
Doe not forget thy self.
She does command then,
This courtesy, because she knows you are noble.
Your Mistress by the way.
My natural Mistress,
Upon these Jewels sir, they are fair and rich•
And view um right.
To doubt um is an heresy.
A thousand ducats, it is upon necessity
Of present use, her husband sir is stubborn.
Long may he be so.
She desires withal, a better knowledge of your parts and person,
And when you please to doe her so much honour.
Comelet's dispatch.
In troth I have heard his say sir,
Of a fat man she has not seen a sweeter,
But in this business sir.
Let's doe it first•
And then dispute, the Ladies use may long •or't.
All secrecy she would desire, she told me
How wise you are.
We are not wise to talk thus,
Carry her the gold, isle look her out a jewel,
Shall sparkle like her eyes, and thee another,
Come pre thee come, I long to serve thy lady,
Long monstrously, now valour I shall meet ye,
You that dare Dukes.
Green goose you are now in sippets.
He shall not have his will, I shall prevent him,
I have a toy here that will t•rne the tide,
And suddenly, and strangely, here Don Iuan,
Doe you present it to him.
I am commanded.
A fellow sounded out of Charity,
And moulded to the height contemn his maker,
Curb the freehand that framed him? This must not be.
That such an oyster shell should hold a pearl,
And of so rare a price in prison,
Was she made to be the matter of her own undoing,
To let a slove•lie unwieldy fellow,
Un•uly and self willed, dispose her beauties,
We suffer all sir in this sad Eclipse,
She should shine where she might show like her self,
An absolute sweetness, to comfort those admire her,
And shed her beams upon her friends.
We are gulled all,
And all the world will grumble at your patience,
If she be ravished thus.
No•e fear it Sanchio,
Weel have her free again, and move at Court,
In her clear orb, but one sweet hansomenesse,
To bless this part of Spain, and have that slubberd.
Tic every good mans cause, and we must stir in it.
Isle warrant he shall be glad to please us,
And glad to share too, we shall hear anon
A new song from him, let's attend a little.
Coronell, I am bound to you for this nobleness,
I should have been your officer, tic true sir,
And a proud man I should have been to have served you•
'Tas pleased the King out of his boundless favours,
To make me your companion, this commission
Gives me a troop of horse.
I rejoice at it,
And am a glad man we shall gain your company,
I am sure the King knows you are newly married,
And out of that respect gives you more time sir.
Within four days I am gone, so he commands me,
And tic not mannerly for me to argue it,
The time grows shorter still, are your goods ready.
They are aboard.
Who waits there?
Sir.
Doe you hear ho, go carry this unto your Mistress sir,
And leather see how much the King has honoured me,
Bid his be lusty, she must make a soldier.
Sir,
Go take down all the hangings,
And pack up all my cloths, my plate and Jewels,
And all the furniture that's portable,
Sir when we lye in garrison, it is necessary
We keep a handsome port, for the kings honour;
And doe you hear, let all your Ladies wardrobe
Be safely placed in trunks, they must along too.
Whether must they go sir.
To the wars Lorenzo,
And you and all, I will not leave a turne-spit,
That has one dram of spleen against a Dutchman.
Why then St Iaques hey, you have made us all sit,
And if we leave ye, does my Lady go too.
The stuff must go to morrow towards the sea sir,
All all must go.
Why Pedro, vasco, Dego.
Come help me, come come boys, soldadoes, comrades,
We'll fley these beere-bellied rogues, come away quickly.
Has taken a brave way to save his honour,
And cross the Duke, now I shall love him dearly,
By the life of credit thou art a noble gentleman.
Why how now wife, what sick at my preferment,
This is not kindly done.
No sooner love ye,
Love ye entirely sir, brought to consider
The goodness of your mind and mine own duty,
But loose you instantly, be divorced from ye,
This is a cruelty, isle to the King
And tell him it is unjust to part two souls,
Too minds so nearly mixed.
By no means sweet heart.
•f he were married but four days as I am.
He would hang himself the fifth, or fly his Country.
He would make it treason for that tongue that durst
But talk of war, or any thing to vex him,
You shalt not go.
Indeed I must sweet wife,
What shall I loose the King for a few kisses,
We'll have enough.
Isle to the Duke my cozen, he shall to th'King.
He did me this great office,
I thank his grace for it, should I pray him now,
To undoe't again, fie it were a ba•e discredit.
Would I were able sir to bear you company,
How willing should I be then, and how merry,
I will not live alone.
Be in peace you shall not.
What k•ockings this, oh heavē my head, why rascals
I think the war's begun in the house already.
The preparation is, they are taking down,
And packing up the hangings, plate and Jewels,
And all those furnitures that shall befit me
When I lye in garrison.
Must the Coach go too Sir?
How will your Lady pass to'th sea else easily?
We shall find shipping fort there to transport it.
I go alas.
Isle have a maine care of ye,
I know ye are sickly, he shall drive the easier,
And all accommodation shall attend ye.
Woudl I were able,
Come I warrant ye,
Am not I with ye sweet, are her clothes packed up,
And all her linens? give your maids direction,
You know my times but short, and I am commanded.
Let me have a nurse,
And all such necessary people with me,
And an easy bark.
It shall not trot I warrant ye,
Curve at it may sometimes.
I am with child sir.
At four days warning, this is something speedy,
Doe you conceive as our jennets doe with a west wind,
My heir will be an arrant fleet one Lady,
Isle swear you were a maid when I first lay with ye.
Pray doe not swear, I thought I was a maid too,
But we may both be consent in that point Sir.
In such a strait point sure I could not err Madam.
This is another tenderness to try him,
Fetch his up now.
You must provide a cradle, and what a troubles that•
The sea shall rock it,
•Tic the best nurse; twill roar and rock together,
A swinging storm will sing you such a lullaby.
Faith let me stay, I shall but shame ye Sir.
And you were a thousand shames you shall along with me,
At home I am sure you'll prove a million,
Every man carries the bundle of his sins,
Upon his own back, you are mine, Isle sweat for ye.
What Sir, preparing for your noble journey?
Tic well and full of care.
J saw your mind was wedded to the war,
And knew you would prove some good man for your coūtry•
Therefore fair Cozen with your gentle pardon,
I got this place, what morn at his advancement?
You are too blame, he will come again sweet cozen,
Mean time like sad Penelope and sage,
Amongst your maids at home, and huswifely.
No sir, I dare not leave her to that solitariness,
She is young, and grief or ill news from those quarters
May daily cross her, she shall go along Sir.
By no means Captain.
By all means an't please ye?
What take a young and tender bodied Lady,
And expose her to those dangers, and those tumults,
A sickly Lady too.
Twill make his well Sir,
Theres no such friend to health as wholesome travel.
Away it must not be.
It ought not Sir,
Go hurry her, it is not humane Captain.
I cannot blame her tears, fright her with tempests
With thunder of the war.
I dare swear if she were able.
She is most able.
And pray ye swear not, she must go theres no remedy,
Nor greatness, nor the trick you had to partus,
Which I smell too rank, too open, too evident
(And I must tell you Sir, tic most unnoble)
Shall hinder me: had she but ten hours life,
Nay less, but two hours, I would have her with me,
I would not leave her fame to so much ruin,
To such a desolation and discredit
As her weakness and your hot will wood work her too.
What Masque is this now?
More tropes and figures, to abuse my sufferance,
What cozen's this?
Michael van owl, how dost thou?
In what dark barn or tod of aged •vi
Hast thou lain hid?
Things must both ebb and flow Coronell,
And people must conceal, and shine again.
You are welcome hither as your friend may say Gentlemā,
A pretty house ye see handsomely seated,
Sweet and convenient walks, the waters crystal.
He's certain mad.
As mad as a French Tailor,
That has nothing in's head but ends of fustians.
I see you are packing now my gentle cozen,
And my wife told me I should find it so,
Tic true I doe, you were merry when I was last here,
But it was your will to try my patience Madam.
I am sorry that my swift occasions
Can let you take your pleasure here no longer,
Yet I would have you think my honoured cozen,
This house and all I have are all your servants.
What house, what pleasure sir, what doe you mean?
You hold the jest so stiff, twill prove discourteous,
This house I mean, the pleasures of this place.
And what of them?
They are mine Sir, and you know it,
My wives I mean, and so conferd upon me,
The hangings sir I must entreat, your servants,
That are so busy in their offices,
Again to minister to their right uses,
I shall take view oath plate anon, and furniture•
That are of under place, you are merry still cozen,
And of a pleasant constitution,
Men of great fortunes make their mirths ad placitum.
Prithee good stubborn wife, tell me directly,
Good evil wife leave fooling and tell me honestly,
Is this my kinsman?
I can tell ye nothing.
I have many kinsmen, but so mad a one,
And so fantastic, all the house.
All mine,
And all within it, I will not bate ye an ace ont,
Can you not receive a noble courtesy,
And quietly and handsomely as ye ought Couze,
But you must ride oath top ont.
Can thou fight?
Isle tell ye presently, I cood have done sir.
For ye must law and claw before ye get it.
Away, no quarrels.
Now I am more temperate,
Isle have it proved if you were never yet in Bedlam,
Never in love for thats a lunacy,
No great state left ye that you never looked for,
Nor cannot manage, thats a rank distemper
That you were christend, and who answered for ye,
And then I yield.
Has half persuaded me I was bred in the moon,
I have ne'er a bush at my breech, are not we both mad,
And is not this a fantastic house we are in,
And all a dream we doe, will ye walk out sir,
And if I doe not beat thee presently
Into a sound belief, as sense can give thee,
Brick me into that wall there for a chimney piece,
And say I was one oath Caesars, done by a seale-cutter.
Isle talk no more, come weal away immediately.
Why then the house is his, and all thats in it,
Isle give away my skin but Isle undo ye,
I gave it to his wife, you must restore Sir,
And make a new provision.
Am I mad now or am I christend, you my pagan co∣zen
My mighty Mahound kinsman, what quirk now;
You shall be welcome all, I hope to see sir
Your Grace here, and my cos, we are all soldiers,
And must doe naturally for one another.
Are ye blank at this, then I must tell ye Sir,
Ye have no command, now ye may go at pleasure
And ride your ass troop, it was a trick I use
To try your jealousy upon entreaty,
And saving of your wife.
All this not moves me,
Nor stirs my gall, nor alters my affections,
You have more furniture, more houses Lady,
And rich ones too, I will make bold with those,
And you have Land ith Indies as I take it,
Thither weal go, and view a while those clymats,
Visit your Factors there, that may betray ye,
Tic done, we must go.
Now thou art a brave Gentleman,
And by this sacred light I love thee dearly,
The house is none of yours, I did but jest Sir,
Nor you are no cos of mine, I beseech ye vanish,
I tell you plain, you have no more right then he
Has, that senseless thing, your wife has once more foold ye:
Go ye and consider.
Good morrow my sweet cozen, I should be glad sir.
By this hand she dies for it,
Or any man that speaks for her.
These are fine toys.
Let me request you stay but one poor month,
You shall have a Commission and isle go too,
Give me but will so far.
Well I will try ye,
Good morrow to your Grace, we have private business.
If I miss thee again, I am an arrant bungler.
Thou shalt have my command, and isle march under thee,
Nay be thy boy before thou shalt be bafled,
Thou art so brave a fellow.
I have seen visions.
Come hither wife, doe you know this hand?
I doe Sir.
Tic Estifanias, that was once my woman.
She writes to me here, that one Cacafogo
A usuring jewellers son (I know the rascal)
Is mortally fallen in love with ye.
Is a monster, deliver me from mountains.
Doe you go a birding for all sorts of people,
And this evening will come to ye and show ye jewels,
And offers any thing to get access to ye,
•f I can make or sport or profit on him•
(For he is fit for both) she bids me use him,
And so I will, be you conformable, and follow but my will.
I shall not fail sir
Will the Duke come again doe you think.
No sure Sir,
Has now no policy to bring him hither•
Nor b•ing you to him, if my wit hold fair wife:
Lets in to dinner.
Had I but lungs enough to bawl sufficiently,
That all the queens in Christendom might hear me,
That men might run away from contagion,
I had my wish; would it were most high treason,
Most infinite high, for any man to marry,
I mean for any man that would live handsomely,
And like a Gentleman, in his wits and credit,
What torments shall I put her to, Phalaris bull now,
Pox they love bulling too well, though they smoke for it,
Cut her apiece, every piece will live still,
And every morsel of her will doe mischief;
They have so many lives, there's no hanging of um
They are too light to drown, they are cork and feathers,
To burn too cold, they live like Salamanders;
Under huge heaps of stones to bury her,
And so depress her as they did the Giants;
She will move under more then built old Babel,
• must destroy her.
Be consent by a thing of clouts, a she moth,
That every silkmans shop breeds; to be cheated,
And of a thousand ducats by a whim wham.
Who's that is cheated, speak again thou vision,
But art thou cheated? minister some comfort,
Tell me directly art thou cheated bravely,
Come, prithee come, art thou so pure a coxcomb
To be not one, doe not dissemble with me,
Tell me I conjure thee.
Then keep thy circle,
For I am a spirit wild that flies about thee,
And who ere thou art, if thou be humane•
Isle let thee plainly know, I am cheated damnably.
Ha, ha, ha.
Dost thou laugh damnably, I say most damnably.
By whom, good spirit speak, speak ha, ha, ha.
I will utter, laugh till thy lungs crack, by a rascal woman,
A lewd, abominable, and plain woman?
Dost thou laugh still.
I must laugh, prithee pardon me,
I shall laugh terribly.
I shall be angry, terrible angry, I have cause.
Thats it, and tic no reason but thou shoe•ldst be angry,
Angry at heart, yet I must laugh still at thee,
By a woman cheated, art' sure it was a woman?
I shall break thy head, my valour itches at thee.
It is no matter, by a woman consent,
A real woman.
A real devil,
Plague of her jewels and her copper chains•
How rank they smell.
Sweet consent sir let me see them,
I have been cheated too, I would have you note that
And lewdly cheated, by a woman also,
A scurvy woman, I am undone sweet Sir,
Therefore I must have leave to laugh.
Pray ye take it,
You are the merriest undone man in Europe.
What need we fiddles, bawdy songs and sack,
When our own miseries can make us merry.
Ha, ha, ha.
I have seen these jewels, what a notable pennyworth
Have you had next your heart, you will not take Sir
Some twenty Ducats.
Thou art deceived I will take.
To clear your bargain now.
Isle take some ten, some any thing, some half ten,
Half a Ducats.
An excellent lapidary set these stones sure,
Doe you mark their waters?
Quick-sand choke their waters,
And hers that bought um too, but I shall find his.
And so shall I, I hope, but doe not hurt her,
You cannot find in all this kingdom,
If you had need of cozening, as you may have,
For such gross natures will desire it often,
Tic at some time too a fine variety,
A woman that can cozen ye so neatly,
She has taken half mine anger off with this trick.
If I were valiant now, I would kill this fellow,
I have money enough lies by me at a pinch
To pay for twenty rascals lives that vex me,
Isle to this Lady, there I shall be satisfied.
Come, weal away unto your country house•
And there weal learn to live contently,
This place is full of charge, a•d full of hurry,
No part of sweetness dwells about these cities.
Whether you will, I wait upon your pleasure;
Live in a hollow tree Sir, Isle live with ye.
I, now you strike a harmony a true one,
When your obedience waits upon your husband,
And your sick will aims at the care of honour,
Why now I dote upon ye, love ye dearly,
And my rough nature falls like roaring streams,
Clearly and sweetly into your embraces,
O what a jewel is a woman excellent,
A wise a virtuous and a noble woman,
When wee meet such, we bear our stamps on both sides,
And through the world we hold our currant virtues,
Alone we are single medals, only faces,
And wear our fortunes out in useless shadows,
Command you now, and ease me of that trouble,
Isle be as humble to you as a servant,
Bid whom you please, invite your noble friends,
They shall be welcome all, visit acquaintance,
Go at your pleasure, now experience
Has linked you fast unto the chain of goodness:
What noise is this, what dismal cry.
Tic loud too.
Sure ther's some mischief done in the street look out there.
Look out and help.
Oh sir the Duke Medina.
What of the Duke Medina.
Oh sweet gentleman, is all most slain.
A way a way &amp; help him, all the house help.
How slain? why Margarita,
Why wife, sure some new device they have a foot again,
Some trick upon my credit, I shall meet it,
I had rather guide a ship Imperial
Alone, and in a storm, then rule one woman.
How came ye hurt sir?
I fell out with my friend the noble Coronell,•
My cause was nought, for it was about your honour:
And he that wrongs the Innocent ne'er prospers;
And he has left me thus for charity,
Lend me a bed to ease my tortured body,
That ere I perish I may show my penitence,
I fear I am slain.
Help gentlemen to carry him,
There shall be nothing in this house my Lord,
But as your own.
I thank ye noble sir.
To bed with him, and wife give your attendance.
Doctors and surgeons.
Doe not disquiet me,
But let me take my leave in peace.
Before me,
Tic rarely counterfeited.
True, it is so sir,
And take you heed, this last blow doe not spoil ye,
He is not hurt, only we made a scuffle,
As though we purposed anger, that same scratch
On's hand he took, to colour all and draw compassion,
That he might get into your house more cunningly,
I must not stay, stand now, and you're a brave fellow.
• thank ye noble Coronell, and I honour ye,
Never be quiet.
He's most desperate ill sir,
I doe not think these ten months will recover him.
Does he hire my house to play the fool in,
Or does it stand on Fairy ground we are haunted,
Are all men and their wives troubled with dreams thus.
What ail you sir?
Nay what ail you sweet wife•
To put these daily pastimes on my patience,
What dost thou see in me, that I should suffer thus,
Have not I done my part like a true husband,
And paid some desperate debts you never looked for.
You have done hand•omely I must confess sir.
Have I not kept thee waking like a hawk?
And watched thee with delights to satisfy thee?
The very tithes of which had won a widow.
Alas I pity ye.
Thou wilt make me angry,
Thou never saw me mad yet.
You are always,
You carry a kind of bedlam still about ye.
If thou persuest me farther I run stark mad,
If you have more hurt Dukes or Gentlemen,
To lye here on your cure, I shall be desperate,
I know the trick, and you shall feel I know it,
Are ye so hot that no hedge can contain ye,
Isle have thee let blood in all the veins about thee,
Isle have thy thoughts found too, and have them opened,
Thy spirits purged, for those are they that fire ye,
Thy maid shall be thy Mistress thou the maid,
And all those servile labours that she reach at,
And go through cheerfully, or else sleep empty,
That maid shall lye by me to teach you duty,
You in a palate by to humble ye,
And greeve for what you loose.
I have lost my self sir,
And all that was my base self, disobedience,
My wantonness my stubbornenesse • have lost too,
And now by that pure faith good wives are crowned with,
By your own nobleness.
I take ye up• and wear ye next my heart,
See you be worth it. Now what with you?
I come to tell my Lady,
There is a fulsome fellow would fain speak with her.
Tic Cacafogo go and entertain him,
And draw him on with hopes.
I shall observe ye.
I have a rare design upon that gentleman,
And you must work too.
I shall sir most willingly.
A way then both, &amp; keep him close in some pl•ce
From the Dukes sight, and keep the Duke in too,
Make um believe both, Isle find time to cure um.
Why how dare thou meet me again thou rebel,
And know how thou hast used me thrice, thou rascal,
Were there not ways enough to fly my vengeance,
No holes nor vaults to hide thee from my fury,
But thou must meet me face to face to kill thee?
I would not seek thee to destroy thee willingly,
But now thou come to invite me,
And come upon me,
How like a sheep biting Rogue taken in the manner,
And ready for the halter dost thou look now,
Thou hast a hanging look thou scurvy thing, hast ne'er a knife
Nor never a string to lead thee to Elisium?
Be there no pitiful Apothecaries in this town,
That have compassion upon wretched women,
And dare administer a dram of rats-bane,
But thou must fall to me?
I know you have mercy.
If I had tons of mercy thou deserve none,
What new tricks is now a foot, and what new houses
Have you in the air, what orchards in apparition,
What can thou say for thy life?
Little or nothing,
I know you'll kill me, and I know tic useless
To beg for mercy, pray let me draw my book out,
And pray a little.
Doe a very little,
For I have farther business then thy killing,
I have money yet to borrow, speak when you are ready.
Now now sir now,
Come on, doe you start off from me,
Doe you swear great Captain, have you seen a spirit.
Doe you wear guns.
I am a soldiers wife sir,
And by that privilege I may be armed,
Now whats the news, and let's discourse more friendly,
And talk of our affairs in peace.
Let me see,
Pre thee let me fee thy gun, it is a very pretty one.
No no sir you shall feel.
Hold ye villain, what thine own husband?
Let mine own •usband then,
Be in's own wits, there, there's a thousand ducats,
Who must provide for you, and yet you'll kill me.
I will not hurt thee for ten thousand millions.
When will you redeem your Jewels, I have pawned um,
You see for what, we must keep tooch.
Isle kiss thee,
And get as many more, isle make thee famous,
Had we the house now.
Come along with me,
If that be vanished there be more to hire sir.
I see I am an ass when thou art near me.
Is the fool come.
Yes and in the cellar fast,
And there he stays his good hour till I call him,
He will make dainty music among the sack-butts,
I have put him just sir, under the Dukes chamber.
It is the better.
Has given me royally,
And to my Lady a whole load of portigues.
Better and better still, go Margarita,
Now play your prize, you say you dare be honest,
Isle put ye to your best.
Secure your self sir, give me the candle,
Pass away in silence.
Who's there, oh oh.
My Lord.
Have ye brought me comfort.
I have my Lord,
Come forth it is I, come gently out Isle help ye,
Come softly too, how doe you.
Are there none here,
Let me look round; we cannot be too wary,
Oh let me bless this hour, are you alone sweet friend.
Alone to comfort you.
What's that you tumble,
I have heard a noise this half hour under me,
A fearful noise.
The fat thing's mad in the cellar,
And stumbles from one hogs head to another,
Two cups more, and he ne'er shall find the way out,
What doe you fear, come, sit down by me cheer•ully,
My husband's safe, how doe your wounds.
I have none Lady,
My wounds I counterfeited cunningly, 
And fained the quarrel too, to enjoy you sweet,
Let's loose no time, hark the same noise again.
What noise, why look ye pale, I hear no stirring,
This goblin in the vault will be so tippled,
You are not well I know by your flying fancy,
Your body's ill at ease, your wounds.
I have none, I am as lusty and as full of health,
High in my blood.
Weak in your blood you would say,
How wretched is my case willing to please ye,
And find you so disable.
Believe me Lady.
I know you will venture all you have to satisfy me,
Your life I know, but is it fit • •poile ye,
Is it my love doe you think.
Here's to the Duke•
It named me certainly,
I heard it plainly sound.
You are hurt mortally,
And fitter for your prayers sir then pleasure,
What starts you make, I would not kiss you wantonly,
For the worlds wealth• have I securd my Husband,
And put all doubts aside to be deluded.
I come I come.
Heaven bless me.
And bless us both, for sure this is the Devil•
I plainly heard it now, he will come to fetch ye,
A very spirit, for he spoke under ground,
And spoke to y•u just as you would have snatched me,
You are a wicked man, and sure this haunts ye,
Would you were out of the house.
I would I were,
A that condition I had leapt a window.
And that's the least leap if you mean to scope sir,
Why what a frantic man were you to come here,
What a weak man to counterfeit deep wounds,
To wound another deeper.
Are you honest then.
Yes then and now, and ever, &amp; excellent honest,
And exercise this pastime but to show ye,
Great men are fools sometimes as well as wretches,
Would you were well hurt with any hope of life,
Cut to the brains, or run clean through the body,
To get out quietly as you got in sir,
I wish it like a friend that loves ye dearly,
For if my husband take ye, and take ye thus a counterfeit,
One that would clip his credit out of his honour,
He must kill ye presently,
There is no mercy nor an hour of pity,
And for me to entreat in such an agony,
Would show me little better then one guilty,
Have you any mind to a Lady now.
Would I were off fair,
If ever Lady caught me in a trap more.
If you be well and lusty, fie fie shake not•
You say you love me, come, come bravely now,
Despise all danger, I am ready for ye.
She mocks my misery, thou cruel Lady.
Thou cruel Lord, would thou betray my honesty,
Betray it in mine own house, wrong my husband,
Like a night thief, thou dare not name by day-light.
I am most miserable.
You are indeed,
And like a foolish thing you have made your self so,
Could not your own discretion tell ye sir,
When I was married I was none of yours,
Your eyes were then commanded to look off me,
And I now stand in a circle and secure,
Your spells nor power can never reach my body,
Mark me but this, and then sir be most miserable,
Tic sacrilege to violate a wedlock,
You rob too Templers, make your self twice guilty,
You ruin hers, and spot his noble husbands.
Let me be gone, Isle never more a tempt ye.
You cannot go, it is not in me to save ye,
Dare ye doe ill, and poorly then shrink under it?
Were I the Duke Medina, I would fight now,
For you must fight and bravely, it concerns you,
You doe me double wrong if you sneak off sir,
And all the world would say I loved a coward,
And you must dye too, for you will be killed,
And leave your youth, your honour and your state,
And all those dear delights you worshipped hear.
The noise again.
Some small beer if you love me.
The Devil haunts you sure, your sins are mighty,
A drunken Devil too, to plague your villainy.
Preserve me but this once.
There•s a deep well
In the next yard, if you dare venture drowning,
It is but death.
I would not dye so wretchedly.
Out of a garrat window Isle let you down then,
But say the rope be rotten, it is huge high too.
have you no mercy.
Now you are frighted thoroughly,
And find what tic to play the fool in folly,
And see with clear eyes your detested folly,
Isle be your guard.
And isle be your true servant,
Ever from this hour virtuously to love ye,
Chastely and modestly to look upon ye,
And here I seal it.
I may kiss a stranger, for you must now be so.
How doe you my Lord,
Me thinks you look but poorly on this matter.
Has my wife wounded ye, you were well before,
Pray sir be comforted, I have forgot all,
Truly forgiven too, wife you are a right one,
And now with unknown nations I dare trust ye.
No more feigned fights my Lord, they never prosper.
Who's this? the Devil in the vault?
Tic he sir, and as lovingly drunk, as though he had stu∣died it.
Give me a cup of Sack, and kiss me Lady,
Kiss my sweet face, and make thy husband cuckold,
An Ocean of sweet Sack, shall we speak treason?
He is devilish drunk.
I had thought he had been a devil.
He made as many noises and as horrible,
Oh a true lover sir will lament loudly,
Which of the butts is your Mistress.
Butt in thy belly.
Theres two in thine I am sure, it is grown so mon∣strous,
Butt in thy face?
Go carry him to sleep,
A fools love should be drunk he has paid well for it too.
When he is sober let him out to rail,
Or hang himself, there will be no loss of him.
Who's this? my Mauhound cozen?
Good Sir, tic very good, would I had a house too,
For there is no talking in the open ayre,
My Tarmogant Couze, I would be bold to tell ye,
I durst be merry too; I tell you plainly•
You have a pretty seat, you have the luck on it,
A pretty Lady too, I have mist both,
My Carpenter built in a mist I thank him,
Doe me the courtesy to let me see it,
See it but once more, But I shall cry for anger.
Isle hire a Chandlers shop close under ye,
And for my foolery, sell soap and whip-cord,
Nay if you doe not laugh now &amp; laugh heartily
You are a fool couze.
I must laugh a little,
And now I have done couze thou shalt live with me
My merry couze, the world shall not divorce us,
Thou art a valiant man, and thou shalt never want•
Will this content thee?
Isle cry, and then isle be •hankfull,
Indeed I will, and isle be honest to ye.
I would live a swallow here I must confess,
Wife I forgive thee all if thou be honest,
At thy peril, I believe thee excellent.
If I prove otherways, let me beg first,
Hold this is yours, some recompense for service,
Use it to nobler ends then he that gave it.
And this is yours, your true commission, Sir,
Now you are a Captain.
You are a noble Prince Sir,
And now a soldier, Gentleman, we all rejoice in it.
Sir, I shall wait upon you through all fortunes•
And I.
And I must needs attend my Mistress.
Will you go sister?
Yes indeed good brother,
I have too ties, mine own blood,
And my Mistress.
Is she your sister?
Yes indeed good wife,
And my best sister,
For she proved so wench,
When she deceived you with a loving husband.
I would not deal so truly for a stranger.
Well I could chide ye,
But it must be lovingly and like a sister,
Isle bring you on your way, and feast ye nobly,
For now I have an honest heart to love ye,
And then deliver you to the blew Neptune.
Your colours you must wear, &amp; wear em proud∣lie,
Wear em before the bullet, and in blood too,
And all the world shall know
We are virtues servants.
And all the world shall know, a noble mind
Makes women beautiful and envy blind.
GOod night our worthy friends, and may you part
Each with as merry and as free a hart
As you came hither; to those noble eyes
That deign to smile on our poor faculties,
And give a blessing to our labouring ends,
As we hope many, to such fortune sends
Their own desires, wives fair as light as chaste;
To those that live by spite
Wives made in hast.

