IS he then taken?
And brought back even now sir.
He was not in disgrace?
No man more loved,
Nor more deserved it, being the only man.
That durst be honest in this Court.
Indeed
We have heard abroad sir, that the State hath suffered,
A great change, since the countess death.
It hath sir.
My five years absence, hath kept me a stranger
So much to all the occurrents of my Country,
As you shall bind me for some short relation
To make me understand the present times.
I must begin then with a war was made
And seven years with all cruelty continued
Upon our Flanders by the Duke of Brabant,
The cause grew thus: during our Earls minority,
Woolfort, (who now usurps) was employed thither
To treat about a match between our Earl
And the daughter and Heir of Brabant: during which treaty
The Brabander pretends, this daughter was
Stolen from his Court, by practice of our State,
Though we are all confirmed, it was a sought quarrel
To lay an unjust gripe upon this Earldom,
It being here believed the Duke of Brabant
Had no such loss. This war upon it proclaimed,
Our Earl, being then a Child, although his Father
Good Gerard lived, yet in respect he was
Chosen by the Countess favour, for her Husband
And but a Gentleman, and Floriz holding
His right unto this Country from his Mother,
The State thought fit in this defensive war,
Woolfort being then the only man of mark,
To make him General.
Which place we have heard
He did discharge with honour.
I, so long,
And with so blessed successes, that the Brabander
Was forced (his treasures wasted, and the choice
Of his best men of Arms tired, or cut off)
To leave the field, and sound a base retreat
Back to his Country: but so broken both
In mind and means, ever to make head again,
That hitherto he sitts down by his loss,
Not daring, or for honour, or revenge
Again to tempt his fortune. But this Victory
More broke our State, and made a deeper hurt
In Flanders, then the greatest overthrow
She ever received: For Woolfort, now beholding
Himself, and actions in the flattering glass
Of selfe-deservings, and that cherished by
The strong assurance of his power, for then
All Captains of the Army, were his creatures,
The common Soldier too at his devotion,
Made so by full indulgence to their ripens
And secret bounties, this strength too well known
And what it could effect, soon put in practice,
As furtherd by the child-hood of the Earl
And their improvidence, that might have pierced
The heart of his designs, gave him occasion
To seize the whole, and in that plight you find it.
Sir, I receive the knowledge of thus much
As a choice favour from you
Only I must add
Bruges holds out.
Whether sir, I am going
For there last night I had a ship put in,
And my horse waits me. 
I wish you a good journey.
What? Hubert stealing from me? who disarmed him,
It was more then I commanded; take your sword,
I am best guarded with it in your hand,
I have seen you use it nobly.
And will turn it
On mine own bosom, ere it shall be drawn
Unworthily or rudely.
Would you leave me
Without a farewell Hubert? fly a friend
Vnwearied in his study to advance you?
What have I ev'r possessed which was not yours?
Or either did not court you to command it?
Who ever yet arrived to any grace,
Reward or trust from me, but his approaches
Wereby your fair reports of him preferred?
And what is more I made my self your Servant,
In making you the Master of those secrets
Which not the rack of conscience could draw from me,
Nor I, when I asked mercy, trust my prayers with;
Yet after these assurances of love,
These ties and bonds of friendship, to forsake me,
Forsake me as an enemy? come you must
Give me a reason.
Sir, and so I will,
If I may do it in private: and you hear it.
All leave the room: you have your will, set down
And use the liberty of our first friendship.
Friendship? when you proved Traitor first, that vanished
Nor do I owe you any thought, but hate,
I know my flight hath forfeited my head;
And so I may make you first understand
What a strange monster you have made your self,
I welcome it.
To me this is strange language.
To you? why what are you?
Your Prince and Master,
The Earl of Flaunders.
By a proper title,
Raised to it by cunning circumvention, force,
Blood, and proscriptions.
And in all this wisdom;
Had I not reason? when by Gerrards plots
I should have first been called to a strict accop
How, and which way I had consumed that mass
Of money, as they term it in the war,
Who underhand, had by his Ministers
Detracted my great action, made my faith
And loyalty so suspected in which failing
He sought my life by practice.
With what fore-head,
Do you speak this to me? who (as I know it)
Must, and will say it is false,
My guard there.
Sir, you bad me sit, &amp; promised you would hear
Which I now say you shall, not a sound more,
For I that am contemner of mine own,
Am Master of your life; then heir's a Sword
Between you, and all aids Sir, though you blind
The credulous beast, the multitude, you pass not
These gross untruths on me.
How? gross untruths.
I, and it is favourable language,
They had bin in a mean man lies, and foul ones.
You take strange licence.
Yes, were not those rumours
Of being called unto your answers, spread
By your own followers; and weak Gerard wrought
(But by your cunnig practise) to be believe
That you were dangerous; yet not to be
Punished by any formal course of law,
But first to be made sure, and have your crimes
Laid open after, which your quaint train taking
You fled unto the Camp, and there craved humbly
Protection for your innocent life, and that,
Since you had escaped the fury of the war,
You might not fall by treason, and for proof,
You did not for your own ends make this danger;
Some that had been before, by you subornd,
Came forth and took their oaths they had been hired
By Gerard to your murder. This once heard,
And easily believed, th'inraged Soldier
Seeing no further then the outward man,
Snatched hastily his Arms, ran to the Court,
Killed all that made resistance, cut in pieces
Such as were Servants, or thought friends to Gerard,
Vowing the like to him.
Will you yet end?
Which he foreseeing, with his Son, the Earl,
Forsook the City; and by secret ways
As you give out, and we would gladly have it,
Escaped their fury: though it is more then feared
They fell among the rest; Nor stand you there
To let us only morn, the impious means
By which you got it, but your cruelties since
So far transcend your former bloody ills,
As if compared, they only would appear
Essays of mischief; do not stop your ears,
More are behind yet.
O repeat them not,
It is hell to hear them named.
You should have thought,
That hell would be your punishment when you did them,
A Prince, in nothing but your princely lusts,
And boundless ripens.
No more I beseech you.
Who was the Lord of house or land, that stood
Within the prospect of your coveteous eye?
You are in this to me a greater Tyrant,
Then ere I was to any.
I end thus
The general grief, now to my private wrong;
The loss of Gerrards daughter Jaqueline:
The hoped for partner of my lawful bed,
Your cruelty hath frighted from mine arms;
And her, I now was wandering to recover.
Think you that I had reason now to leave you,
When you are grown so justly odious,
That even my stay here with your grace and favour,
Makes my life ircksome? here surely take it,
And do me but this fruit of all your friendship,
That I may dye by you, and not your hang-man.
Oh Hubert, these your words and reasons have
As well drawn drops of blood from my grieved hart,
As these tears from mine eyes;
Despise them not
By all that's sacred, I am serious Hubert,
You now have made me sensible, what furies,
Whips, hangmen, and tormentors a bad man
Do's ever bear about him: let the good
That you this day have done, be ever numberd,
The first of your best actions;
Can you think,
Where Floriz is or Gerard, or your love,
Or any else, or all that are proscribed?
I will resign, what I usurp, or have
Unjustly forced; the days I have to live
Are too too few to make them satisfaction
With any penitence: yet I vow to practise
All of a man.
O that your hart and tongue
Did not now differ!
By my griefs they do not
Neck the good pains to search them out; it is worth it,
You have made clean a Leper: trust me you have,
And made me once more fit for the society,
I hope of good men.
Sir, do not abuse
My aptness to believe.
Suspect not you
A faith that's built upon so true a sorrow,
Make your own safeties: ask them all the ties
Humanity can give, Hemskirick too shall
Along with you to this so wished discovery,
And in my name profess all that you promise;
And I will give you this help to it: I have
Of late received certain intelligence,
That some of them are in or about Bruges
To be found out: which I did then interpret,
The cause of that Towns standing out against me;
But now am glad, it may direct your purpose
Of giving them their safety, and me peace.
Be constant to your goodness, &amp; you have it. 
It is much that you deliver of this Goswin.
But short of what I could, yet have the Country
Confirmed it true, and by a general oath,
And not a man hazard his credit in it:
He bears himself with such a confidence
As if he were the Master of the Sea;
And not a wind upon the Sailors compass,
But from one part or other, was his factor,
To bring him in the best commodities,
Merchant ever ventured for:
It is strange,
And yet;
This do's in him deserve the least of wonder,
Compared with other his peculiar fashions,
Which all admire: he's young, and rich, at least
Thus far reputed so, that since he lived
In Bruges, there was never brought to harbour
So rich a Bottom, but his bill would pass
Unquestioned for her lading.
Yet he still
Continues a good man.
So good, that but
To doubt him, would be held an injury
Or rather malice, with the best that traffic;
But this is nothing, a great stock, and fortune,
Crowning his judgement in his undertakings
May keep him upright that way: But that wealth
Should want the power to make him dote on it,
Or youth teach him to wrong it, best commends
His constant temper; for his outward habit
It is suitable to his present course of life:
His table furnished well, but not with dainties
That please the appetite only for their rareness,
Or the dear price: nor given to wine or women,
Beyond his health, or warrant of a man,
I mean a good one: and so loves his state
He will not hazard it at play; nor lend
Upon the assurance of a well-pen'd Letter,
Although a challenge second the denial
From such as make th'opinion of their valour
Their means of feeding.
These are ways to thrive,
And the means not cursed.
What follows this,
Makes many Venturers with him, in their wishes,
For his prosperity: for when desert
Or reason leads him to be liberal,
His noble mind and ready hand contend
Which can add most to his free courtesies,
Or in their worth, or speed to make them so.
Is there a Virgin of good fame wants dowre?
He is a father to her; or a Soldier
That in his Countries service, from the war
Hath brought him only scars, and want? his house
Receives him, and relieves him, with that care
As if what he possessed had been laid up
For such good uses, and he steward of it.
But I should loose my self to speak him further
And stale in my relation, the much good
You may be witness of, if your remove
From Brugis, be not speedy.
This report
I do assure you will not hasten it,
Nor would I wish a better man to deal with
For what I am to part with.
Never doubt it,
He is your man and ours, only I wish
His too much forwardness to embrace all bargains
Suck him not in the end.
Have better hopes,
For my part I am confident; here he comes.
I take it at your own rates: your wine of Cyprus,
But for your Candy sugars, they have met
With such foul weather, and are prized so high
I cannot save in them.
I am unwilling
To seek another Chap-man: make me offer
Of something near my price, that may assure me
You can deal for them.
I both can, and will,
But not with too much loss; your bill of lading
Speaks of two hundred chests, valued by you
At thirty thousand guilders. I will have them
At twenty eight; so, in the payment of
Three thousand sterling, you fall only in
Two hundred pound.
You know, they are so cheap.???
Why look you; I'll deal fairly, ther's in prison,
And at your suite, a Pirate, but unable
To make you satisfaction, and past hope
To live a week, if you should prosecute
What you can prove against him: set him free,
And you shall have your money to a Stiver,
And present payment.
This is above wonder,
A Merchant of your rank, that have at Sea
So many Bottoms in the danger of
These water-Theeves, should be a means to save 'em
It more importing you for your own safety
To be at charge to scour the Sea of them
Then stay the sword of Justice, that is ready
To fall on one so conscious of his guilt
That he dares not deny it.
You mistake me,
If you think I would cherish in this Captain
The wrong he did to you, or any man;
I was lately with him, (having first, from others
True testimony been assured, a man
Of more desert never put from the shore)
I read his letters of Mart from this State granted
For the recovery of such losses, as
He had received in Spain, it was that he aimed at,
Not at three tuns of wine, biscuit, or beef,
Which his necessity made him take from you.
If he had pillaged you near, or sunk your ship,
Or thrown your men o'r-boord, then he deserved
The Laws extremest rigour: But since want
Of what he could not live without, compelled him
To that he did (which yet our State calls death)
I pity his misfortune; and to work you
To some compassion of them, I come up
To your own price: save him, the goods are mine;
If not, seek else-where, I'll not deal for them.
Well Sir, for your love, I will once be lead
To change my purpose.
For your profit rather.
I'll presently make means for his discharge,
Till when, I leave you.
What do you think of this?
As of a deed of noble pity: guided
By a strong judgement.
Save you Master Goswin.
Good day to all.
We bring you the refusal
Of more Commodities.
Are you the owners
Of the ship that lastnight put into the Harbour?
Both of the Ship, and lading.
What's the fraught?
Indico, Quitchineel, choice Chyna stuffs.
And cloth of Gold brought from Camball.
Rich lading,
For which I were your Chapman, but I am
Already out of cash.
I'll give you day
For the moiety of all.
How long?
Six months.
It is a fair offer: which (if we agree
About the prizes) I, with thanks accept of,
And will make present payment of the rest;
Some two hours hence I'll come aboard.
The Gunner shall speak you welcome.
I'll not fail,
Good morrow. 
Heaven grant my Ships a safe return, before
The day of this great payment: as they are
Expected three months sooner: and my credit
Stands good with all the world. 
Bless my good Master,
The prayers of your poor Beads-man ever shall
Be sent up for you.
God he mercy Clause,
Ther's something to put thee in mind hereafter
To think of me.
May he that gave it you
Reward you for it, with increase, good Master.
I thrive the better for thy prayers.
I hope so.
This three years have I fed upon your bounties,
And by the fire of your blessed charity warmed me,
And yet, good Master, pardon me, that must,
Though I have now received your alms, presume
To make one suit more to you.
What is it Clause?
Yet do not think me impudent I beseech you,
Since hitherto your charity hath prevented
My begging your relief, it is not for money
Nor clothes (good Master) but your good word for me.
That thou shalt have, Clause, for I think thee honest.
To morrow then (dear Mr.) take the trouble
Of walking early unto Beggars Bush,
And as you see me, among others (Brethren
In my affliction) when you are demanded
Which you like best among us, point out me,
And then pass by, as if you knew me not.
But what will that advantage thee?
O much Sir,
Twill give me the pre-eminence of the rest,
Make me a King among 'em, and protect me,
From all abuse, such as are stronger, might
Offer my age; Sir, at your better leisure
I will inform you further of the good
It may do to me.
'Troth thou make me wonder;
Have you a King and Common-wealth among you?
We have, &amp; there are States are governed worse.
Ambition among Beggars?
Many great ones
Would part with half their States, to have the place,
And credit to beg in the first file, Master:
But shall I be so much bound to your furtherance
In my Petition?
That thou shalt not miss of,
Nor any worldly cane make me forget it,
I will be early there.
Heaven bless my Master. 
COme Princes of the ragged regiment,
You 'o the blood, Prig my most upright Lord,
And these (what name or title, ever they bear)
Jarkman, or Patrico, Crank, or Clapperdudgeon.
Fritter, or Abram-man; I speak to all
That stand in fair Election for the title
Of King of Beggars, with the command adjoining,
Higgen, your Orator, in this Inter-regnum,
That meanwhile was your Dommerer, doth beseech you
All to stand fair, and put your selves in rank,
That the first Commer, may at his first view
Make a free choice, to say up the question.
It is done Lord Higgen.
Thanks to Prince Prig, Prince Ferret.
Well, pray my Masters all, Ferret be chosen
Ye'ar like to have a merciful mild Prince of me.
A very tyrant, I, an arrant tyrant.
If ever I come to reign; therefore look to it,
Except you do provide me hum enough
And Lore to bozo with: I must have my Capons
And Turkeys brought me in, with my green Geese,
And Ducklings in the season: fine fat chickens,
Or if you chance where an eye of tame Pheasants
Or Partridges are kept, see they be mine,
Or straight I seize on all your privilege,
Places, revenues, offices, as forfeit,
Call in your crutches, wooden legs, false bellies,
Forced eyes and teeth, with your dead arms; not leave you
A dirty clout to beg with of your heads,
Or an old rag with Butter, Frankincense,
Brimstone and Rosin, birdlime, blood, and cream,
To make you an old sore; not so much soap
As you may some with in the Falling-sicknesse;
The very bag you bear, and the brown dish
Shall be escheated. All your daintiest dells too
I will deflower, and take your dearest Doxyes
From your warm sides; and then some one cold night
I'll watch you what old barn you go to roost in,
And there I'll smoother you all in the musty hay.
This is tyrant-like indeed: But what would Ginkes
Or Clause be here, if either of them should reign?
Best ask an ass, if he were made a Camel,
What he would be; or a dog, and he were a Lyon.
I care not what you are, Sirs, I shall be
A Beggar, still, I am sure, find my self there.
O here a Judge comes.
Cry, a Judge, a Judge.
What ail you Sirs? what means this out cry?
Master
A sort of poor souls met: Gods fools, good Master,
Have had some little variance amongst our selves
Who should be honestest of us; and which lives
Uprightest in his call: Now, because we thought
We ne'er should gre on it our selves, because
Indeed it is hard to say: we all dissolved, to put it
To whom that should come next, and that's your Mastership,
Who, I hope, will termine it as your mind serves you,
Right, and no otherwise we ask it: which?
Which does your Worship think is he? sweet Master
Look over us all, and tell us; we are seven of us,
Like to the seven wise Masters, or the Planets.
I should judge this the man with the grave beard,
And if he be not???
Bless you, good Master, bless you.
I would he were: there's something too, amongst you
To keep you all honest. 
King of heaven go with you.
Now good reward him,
May he never want it, to comfort still the poor, in a good hour.
What is 't? see: Snap he's got it.
A good crown, marry:
A crown of gold.
For our new King: good luck.
To the common treasury with it; if 't be gold,
Thither it must.
Spoke like a Patriot, Ferret???
King Clause. I bid God save thee first, first, Clause,
After this golden token of a crown;
Wher's Orator Higgen with his gratuling speech now,
In all our names?
Here he is pumping for it.
H' has coughed the second time, it is but once more
And then it comes.
So, out with all: expect now???
That thou art chosen, venerable Clause,
Our King and Sovereign; Monarch of the Maunders.
Thus we throw up our Nab-cheats, first for joy,
And then our filches; last, we clap our fambles,
Three subject signs, we do it without envy:
For who is he here did not wish thee chosen
Now thou art chosen? ask 'em: all will say so,
Nay swear it: it is for the King, but let that pass;
When last in conference at the bouzing ken
This other day we sate about our dead Prince
Of famous memory: (rest, go with his rags:)
And that I saw thee at the tables end,
Rise moved, and gravely leaning on one Crutch,
Lift the other like a Sceptre at my head,
I then presaged thou shortly would be King
And now thou art so: but what need presage,
To us, that might have read it, in thy beard,
As well, as he that chose thee? by that beard
Thou were found out, and marked for Sovereignty.
O happy beard! but happier Prince, whose beard,
Was so remarked, as marked out our Prince,
Not bating us a hair. Long may it grow,
And thick, and fair, that who lives under it,
May live as safe, as under Beggars Bush,
Of which this is the thing, that but the type.
Excellent, excellent orator, forward good Higgen
Give him leave to spit: the fine, well-spoken Higgen.
This is the beard, the bush, or bushy-beard,
Under whose gold and silver reign it was said
So many ages since, we all should smile
On impositions, taxes, grievances,
Knots in a State, and whips unto a Subject,
Lye lurking in this Beard, but all hemmed out:
If now, the Beard be such, what is the Prince
That owes the Beard? a Father; no, a Grandfather;
Nay the great Grand-father of you his people.
He will not force away your hens, your bacon,
When you have ventured hard for it, nor take from you
The fattest of your puddings: under him
Each man shall eat his own stolen eggs, and butter,
In his own shade, or sun-shine, and enjoy
His own dear Dell, Doxy, or Mort, at night
In his own straw, with his own shirt, or sheet,
That he hath filched that day, I, and possess
What he can purchase, back, or belly-cheats
To his own prop: he will have no purveyors
For Pigs, and poultry.
That we must have, my learned Orator,
It is our will, and every man to keep
In his own path and circuit.
Do you hear?
You must hereafter maund on your own pads he says.
And what they get there, is their own, besides
To give good words.
Do you mark? to cut been whids,
That is the second Law.
And keep afoot
The humble, and the common phrase of begging,
Lest men discover us.
Yes; and cry sometimes,
To move compassion: Sir, there is a table,
That doth command all these things, and enjoyns 'em;
Be perfect in their crutches: their feigned plasters,
And their true pas-ports, with the ways to stammer,
And to be dumb, and deaf, and blind, and lame,
There, all the halting paces are set down,
In the learned language.
Thither I refer them,
Those, you at leisure shall interpret to them,
We love no heaps of laws, where few will serve.
O gracious Prince, 'save, 'save the good K. Clause.
A Song to crown him.
Set a Sentinel out first.
The word?
A Cove comes, and fumbumbis to it.??? 
CAst our Caps and cares away: this is Beggars Holli-day,
At the Crowning of our King, thus we ever dance &amp; sing.
In the world look out and see: where so happy a Prince as he?
Where the Nation live so free, and so merry as do we?
Be it peace, or be it war, here at liberty we are,
And enjoy our ease and rest; To the field we are not pressed;
Nor are called into the Town, to be troubled with the Gown.
Hang all Offices we cry, and the Magistrate too, by;
When the Subsidies increased, we are not a penny ceased.
Nor will any go to law, with the Beggar for a straw.
All which happiness he brags, he doth owe unto his rags.
A Cove: Fumbumbis.
To your postures; arm:
Yonder's the Town: I see it.
Ther's our danger
Indeed before us, if our shadows save not.
Bless your good Worships:
One small piece of money.
Amongst us all poor wretches:
Blind, and lame,
For his sake that gives all.
Pitiful Worships;
One little doyt.
King, by your leave, where are you?
To buy a little bread,
To feed so many
Mouths, as will ever pray for you.
Here be seven of us.
Seven, good Master, ?? remember seven,
Seven blessings.
Remember, gentle Worship.
Against seven deadly sins,
And seven sleepers.
If they be hard of heart, and will give nothing???
Alas, we had not a charity this three days.
Ther's amongst you all?
Heaven reward you.
Lord, reward you?
The Prince of pity bless thee.
Do I see? or is it my fancy that would have it so?
Ha? it is her face: come hither Maid.
What have, you
Bells for my squirrel? I have given Bun meat,
You do not love me, do you? catch me a butterfly,
And I'll love you again; when? can you tell?
Peace, we go a birding: I shall have a fine thing.
Her voice too says the same; but for my head
I would not that her manners, were so changed,
Hear me thou honest fellow; what's this Maiden,
That lives amongst you here?
Ao, ao, ao, ao.
How? nothing but signs?
Ao, ao, ao, ao.
This strange,
I would sane have it her, but not her thus.
He is de-de-de-de-de-de-deafe, and du-du-dude???dumb Sir.
Slid they did all speak plain even now me thought
Dost thou know this same Maid?
Why, why, why, why, which, go, go, go, go, Gods fool
She was bo-bo-bo-bo-borne at the barn yonder,
By-be-be-be-be-Beggars Bush-bo-bo-Bush
Her name is, My-my-my-my-my-match: so was her Mo-mo-mo-Mothers too-too
I understand no word she says; how long
Has she been here?
Lo-lo-long enough to be ni-ni-nigled: and she have go-go-go-good luck,
I must be better informed, then by this way.
Here was another face too, that I marked
O the old mans: but they are vanished all
Most suddenly: I will come here again,
O, that I were so happy, as to find it,
What I yet hope? it is put on.
What mean you Sir,
To stay there with that stammerer?
Farewell friend,???
It will be worth return, to search: Come,
Protect us our disguise now, prithee Hemskirck
If we be taken, how dost thou imagine
This Town will use us, that hath stood so long
Out, against Woolfort?
Even to hang us forth
Upon their walls a sunning, to make Crows meat,
If I were not assured 'o the Burgomaster,
And had a pretty skuys, to see a niece there,
I should scarce venture.
Come it is now too late
To look back at the ports: good luck, and enter. 
Still blow thou there? and from all other parts,
Do all my Agents sleep? that nothing comes?
Ther's a conspiracy of winds, and servants:
If not of Elements, to have me break;
What should I think unless the Seas, and Sands
Had swallowed up my ships? or fire had spoiled
My ware-houses? or death devoured my Facto
I must have had some returns;
'Saue you Sir.
'Save you.
No news, yet 'o your Ships?
Not any yet Sir.
It is strange.
It is true Sir: what a voice was here now?
This was one passing bell, a thousand ravens
Sung in that man now, to presage my ruins.
Goswin, good day, these winds, are very constant.
They are so Sir; to hurt???
Ha? you had no letters,
Lately from England, nor from Denmark?
Neither.
This wind brings them; nor no news over land,
Through Spain, from the Straights?
Not any.
I am sorry Sir.
They talk me down: and as it is said, of Vultures
They sent a field fought, and do smell the carcasses
By many hundred miles: So do these, my wrecks
At greater distances: why thy will heaven
Come on, and be: yet if thou please, preserve me;
But in my own adventure, here at home,
Of my chaste love, to keep me worthy of her,
It shall be put in scale against all ill fortunes:
I am not broken yet: nor should I fall,
Me thinks with less then that, that ruins all. 
Captain you are welcome; so is this your friend
Most safely welcome, though our Town stand out
Against your Master; you shall find good quarter:
The troth is, we not love him: Meg: some wine,
Let's talk a little treason, If we can
Talk treason, gain' the Traitors; by your leave, Gentlemen
We here in Brugis, think he do's usurp,
And therefore I am bold with him.
Sir, your boldness,
Happily becomes your mouth, but not our ears,
While we are his servants; And as we come here,
Not to ask questions, walk forth on your walls;
Visit your courts of guard, view your Munition,
Ask of your corne-provisions, nor enquire
Into the least, as spies upon your strengths,
So let's entreat, we may receive from you
Nothing in passage or discourse, but what
We may with gladness, and our honesties here,
And that shall seal our welcome.
Good: let's drink then,
fill out, I keep mine old pearl still Captain.
I hang fast man.
Old Jewels, commend their keeper, Sir.
Heir's to you with a hart, my Captains friend,
With a good heart, and if this make us speak
Bold words, anon: it is all under the Rose
Forgotten: drown all memory, when we drink
It is freely spoken noble Burgomaster,
I'll do you right.
Nay Sir mine heir Van-dunck,
Is a true Statesmen.
Fill my Captains cup there, ?? that your Master Woolfort.
Had been an honest man.
Sir?
Under the Rose.
Heir's to you Marget.
Welcome; welcome Captain.
Well said my pearl still,
Well said, my pearl still,
And how does my Niece?
Almost a woman; I think? This friend of mine,
I drew along with me, through so much hazard,
Only to see her: she was my errand.
I, a kind Uncle you are (fill him his glass)
That in seven years, could not find leisure.???
No,
It's not so much.
I'll bate you nev'r an hour on it,
I was before the Brabander began his war,
For moone-shine, in the water there, his daughter
That never was lost: yet you could not find time
To see a Kinswoman: But she is worth the seeing Sir.
Now you are come, you ask if she were a woman?
She is a woman Sir; fetch her forth Merge.
And a fine woman, and has Suitors.
How?
What Suitors are they.
Bachelors: young Burgers:
And one, a gallant, the young Prince of Merchants,
We call him here, in Bruges.
How? a Merchant?
I thought Van-doncke, you had understood me better,
And my Niece too, so trusted to you by me:
Then t'admit of such in name of Suitors.
Such? he is such a such, as were she mine
I'd give him thirty thousand crowns with her.
But the same things Sir, fit not you and me. 
Why, give's some wine, then; This will fit us all:
Here's to you still, my Captains friend: All out:
And still, would Woolfort were an honest man,
Under the Rose, I speak it: but this Merchant
Is a brave boy: he lives so, in the town here,
We know not what to think on him: At sometimes
We fear he will be Bankrupt; he do's stretch
Tenter his credit so; embraces all,
And too't, the winds have been contrary, long.
But then, if he should have all his returns,
We think he would be a King, and are half sure on it.
Your Master is a Traitor, for all this
Under the Rose: here's to you; and usurps
The Earldom ftom a better man.
I marry Sir,
Where is that man?
Nay soft: and I could tell you
It is ten to one I would not: here's my hand,
I love not Woolfort: sit you still, with that:
Here comes my Captain again, and his fine Niece,
And ther's my Merchant: view him well, fill wine here.
You must not only know me for your Uncle,
Now, but obey me; you, go cast your self
Away, upon a dunghill here? a Merchant?
A petty fellow? one that makes this trade
With oaths and perjuries?
What is that you say Sir?
If it be me you speak of; as your eye
Seems to direct: I wish you would speak to me, Sir.
Sir, I do say, she is no Merchandise,
Will that suffice you?
Merchandise good Sir,
Though ye be Kinsman to her: take no leave thence
To use me with contempt: I ever thought
Your Niece above all price.
And do so still, Sir,
I assure you, her rate's at more then you are worth.
You do not know, what a Gentleman's worth sir,
Nor can you value him.
Well said Merchant.
Nay,
Let him alone, and ply your matter.
A Genntleman?
What, of the wool-pack? or the Sugar-chest?
Or lists of Velvet? which is it? pound, or yard,
You vent your Gentry by?
O Hemskirke, fie.
Come, do not mind 'em drink, he is no Woolfort,
Captain, I advise you.
Alas, my pretty man,
I think it be angry, by its look: Come hither,
Turn this way, a little: if it were the blood
Of Charlemain, as 't may (for ought I know)
Be some good Botchers issue, here in Bruges.
How?
Nay: I'm not certain of that; of this I am,
If it once buy, and sell, its Gentry is gone.
Ha, ha:
You are angry, though ye laugh.
No, now it is pity
Of your poor argument. Do not you, the Lords,
Of land (if you be any) sell the grass,
The corn, the straw, the milk, the cheese?
And butter:
Remember butter; doe not leave out butter.
The Beefs and Muttons that your grounds are stored with?
Swine, with the very mast, beside the woods?
No, for those sordid uses, we have Tenants,
Or else our Bailiffs.
Have not we Sir, Chap-men,
And Factors, then to answer these? your error
Fetched from the Heralds A B C. and said over
With your Court faces, once an hour, shall never
Make me mistake my self. Do not your Lawyers
Sell all their practise, as your Priests their prayers?
What is not bought, and sold? The company
That you had last, what had you fort, y'faith?
You now grow saucy.
Sure I have been bred
Still, with my honest liberty, and must use it.
Upon your equals, then.
Sir, he that will
Provoke me first, doth make himself my equal.
Do ye hear? no more.
Yes Sir, this little, I pray you,
And't shall be aside, then after, as you please,
You appear the Uncle, s???ir, to her I love,
More then mine eyes; and I have heard your scorns
With so much scoffing, and so much shame,
As each strive which is greater: But, believe me
I sucked not in this patience with my milk.
Do not presume, because you see me young,
Or cast despights on my profession
For the civility and tameness of it.
A good man bears a contumely worse
Then he would do an injury. Proceed not
To my offence: wrong is not still successful,
Indeed it is not: I would approach your Kins-woman
With all respect, done to your self and her.
Away Companion: handling her? take that.
Nay, I do love no blows, sir, there's exchange.
Hold sir,
O murder.
Help, my Goswin.
Man.
Let 'em alone; my life for one.
Nay come
If you have will.
None to offend you, I, Sir.
He that had, thank himself: not hand her? yes Sir,
And clasp her, and embrace her; and (would she
Now go with me) bear her through all her race,
Her Father, Brethren, and her Uncles, arme'd,
And all their Nephews, though they stood a wood
Of pikes, and wall of Canon: kiss me Gertrude,
Quake not, but kiss me.
Kiss him, girl, I bid you;
My Merchant royal; fear no Uncles: hang 'em,
Hang up all Uncles: Are we not in Bruges?
Under the Rose here?
In this circle, Love,
Thou are as safe, as in a tower of brass;
Let such as do wrong, fear.
I, that's good,
Let Woolfort look to that.
Sir, here she stands,
Your Niece, and my beloved. One of these titles
She must apply to; if unto the last,
Not all the anger can be sent unto her,
In frown, or voice, or other art, shall force her,
Had Hercules a hand in it: Come, my Joy,
Say thou art mine, aloud Love, and profess it.
Doe: and I drink to it.
Prithee say so, Love.
It would take away the honour from my blushes:
Doe not you play the Tyrant, sweet: they speak it.
I thank you Niece.
Sir, thank her for your life,
And fetch your sword within.
You insult too much
With your good fortune, Sir. 
A brave clear spirit;
Hemskirke, you were too blame: a civil habit
Oft covers a good man: and you may meet
In person of a Merchant, with a soul
As resolute, and free, and all ways worthy,
As else in any file of man-kinde: pray you,
What meant you so to slight him?
It is done now,
Ask no more of it; I must suffer. 
This,
Is still the punishment of rashness, sorrow;
Well; I must to the woods, for nothing here
Will be got out. There, I may chance to learn
Somewhat to help my enquiries further.
Ha?
A Looking-glasse.
How now, brave Burgo-master?
I love no Woolforts, and my names Vandoncke,
Van-drunke it's rather: Come, go sleep within.
Earl Floras is right heir, and this same Woolfort
Under the Rose I speak it. ???
Very hardly.
Usurps: and a rank Traitor, as ever breathed,
And all that do uphold him. Let me go,
No man shall hold me, that upholds him;
Doe you uphold him?
No.
Then hold me up. 
Sir, I presume, you have a sword of your own,
That can so handle another.
Faith you may Sir.
And ye have made me have so much better thoughts of you
As I am bound to call you forth.
For what Sir?
To the repairing of mine honour, &amp; hurt here.
Express your way.
By fight, and speedily.
You have your will: Require you any more?
That you be secret: and come single.
I will.
As you are the Gentleman?? you would be thought.
Without the Conjuration: and I'll bring
Only my sword, which I will fit to yours,
I'll take his length within.
Your place now Sir?
By the Sand-hills.
Sir, nearer to the woods,
If you thought so, were fitter.
There, then.
good.
Your time?
Twixt seven and eight.
You'll give me Sir
Cause to report you worthy of my Niece,
If you come, like your promise.
If I do not
Let no man think to call me unworthy first,
I'll do it my self: and justly wish to want her.??? 
COme, English beer Hostess, English beer bi'th belly
Start beer boy, stout &amp; strong beer: so, sit down Lads,
And drink me upsey-Dutch:
Frolic, and fear not.
Have ye any work for the Sow-gelder, boa,
My horn goes to high to low, to high to low.
Have ye any Pigs, Calves, or Colts,
Have ye any Lambs in your holts
To cut for the Stone
Here comes a cunning one.
Have ye any branches to spade,
Or ever a fair maid
That would be a Nun,
Come kiss me, it is done.
Hark how my merry borne doth blow,
Too high too low, too high too low.
O excellent! two-pence a piece boys, two-pence a piece:
Give the boys some drink there. Piper, wet your whistle.
Can tell me a way now, how to cut off my wives Con???cupiscence?
I'll sing ye a Song for it.
TAke her, and hug her,
And turn her &amp; tug her,
And turn her again boy, again,
Then if she mumble,
Or if her tail tumble,
Kiss her amain boy, amain.
Do thy endeavour,
To take off her fever,
Then her disease no longer will reign.
If nothing will serve her,
Then thus to preserve her,
Swinge her amain boy amain.
Give her cold jelly
To take up her belly,
And once a day swinge her again
If she stand all these pains
Then knock out her brains,
Her disease no longer will reign.
More excellent, more excellent, sweet Sow-gelder.
Three-pence a peace, three-pence a peace.
Will you hear a Song how the Devil was gelded?
I, I, lets hear the Devil roar, Sow-gelder.
Groats a piece, groats a piece, groats a piece,
There sweet Sow-gelder.
Will ye see any feats of activity,
Some slight of hand, leigerdemaine? hey pass,
Presto, be gone there?
Sit down Juggler.
Sirha, play you your art well; draw near piper:
Look you, my honest friends, you see my hands;
Plain dealing is no Devil: lend me some money;
Twelve-pence a piece will serve.
There, there.
I thank you,
Thank ye heartily: when shall I pay ye?
Ha, ha, ha, by the mass this was a fine trick.
A merry slight toy: but now I'll show your Worships
A trick indeed.
Mark him well now my Masters.
Here are three balls,
These balls shall be three bullets,
One, two, and three: ascentibus malentibus.
Presto, be gone: they are vanished: fair play Gentlemen,
Now these three, like 3. bullets, from your three noses
Will I pluck presently: fear not, no harm boys,
Titter, tu patule.
Oh, oh, oh.
Recubans sub jermine fagi.
Ye pull too hard; ye pull too hard.
Stand fair then:
Silvertramtrim-tram.
Hold, hold, hold.
Come aloft bullets three, with a whim-wham:
Have ye their moneys?
Yes, yes.
Oh rare Juggler.
Oh admirable Juggler,
One trick more yet;
Hey, come aloft: sa, sa, flim, flume, taradumbis?
East, west, north, south, now fly like Jacke with a bumbis.
Now all your money's gone: pray search your pockets.
Humh.
He,
The Devil a penny's here.
This was a rare trick.
But it would be a far rarer to restore it.
I'll doe ye that too: look upon me earnestly,
And move not any ways your eyes from this place,
This button here: pow, whir, whizz, shake your pockets
By the mass it is here again boys.
Rest ye merry;
My first trick has paid me.
I, take it, take it,
And take some drink too.
Not a drop now I thank you;
Away, we are discovered else. 
BRing out your Cony-skins, fair maids to me,
And hold 'em fair that I may see;
Grey, black, and blew: for your smaller skins,
I'll give ye looking-glasses, pins.
And for your whole Coney, heir's ready ready money.
Come gentle Jon, do thou begin
With thy black, black, black Cony-skin.
And Mary then, and Jane will follow,
With their silver-hair'd skins, and their yellow.
The white Cony-skin, I will not lay by,
For though it be faint, tic fair to the eye,
The grey it is warm, but yet for my money,
Give me the bonny, bonny black Coney.
Come away fair maids, your skins will decay:
Come, and take money maids, put your ware away.
Cony-skins, Cony-skins, have ye any Cony-skins,
I have fine brace-lets, and fine silver pins.
Buy any brand wine, buy any brand wine?
Have ye any Cony-skins.
My fine Canary-bird, ther's a cake for thy worship,
Come, fill, fill, fill, fill suddenly: let's see Sir,
What's this?
A penny Sir.
Fill till't be six-pence,
And there's my pig.
This is a counter Sir.
A counter? stay ye, what are these then?
O execrable Juggler! ?? damned Juggler!
Look in your hose, hoe: this comes of looking forward.
Devil a Dunkirk! what a rogue's this Juggler,
This hey pass, repose, he has repast us sweetly.
Doe ye call these tricks.
Have ye any ends of gold or silver.
This fellow comes to mock us; gold or silver? cry copper.
Yes my good friend,
We have even an end of all we have.
'Ts well Sir,
You have the less to care for: gold and silver, 
Have ye any old cloaks to sell, have ye any old cloaks to sell. 
Cloaks? look about ye boys: mine's gone.
A ???juggle 'em?
??? of their Prestos: mine's gone too.
Here's mine yet.
Come, come, let's drink then: more brand wine.
Here Sir.
If ever I catch your Sow-gelder, by this hand I'll strip him;
Were ever fools so forked? we have two cloaks yet,
And all our caps; the Devil take the flincher.
Yaw, yaw, yaw, yaw.
Good do my honest fellows,
You are merry here I see.
It is all we have left Sir.
What hast thou? Aquavitae?
Yes.
Fill out then,
And give these honest fellows round.
We thank ye.
May I speak a word in private to ye?
Yes Sir.
I have a business for you, honest friends,
If you dare lend your help, shall get you crowns.
Ha?
Lead me a little nearer, boy.
What is it Sir?
If it be any thing to purchase money,
Which is our want, command us.
All, all, all Sir.
You know the young spruce Merchant in Brugis.
Who? Master Goswin?
That: he owes me money,
And here in town there is no stirring of him.
Say ye so?
This day, upon a sure appointment,
He meets me a mile hence, by the Chase side
Under the row of Oaks, do you know it?
Yes Sir.
Give 'em more drink: there if you dare but venture
When I shall give the word to seize upon him,
Here's twenty pound.
Beware the Juggler.
If he resist, down with him, have no mercy.
I warrant you: we'll hamper him.
To discharge you,
I have a warrant here about me.
Her's our warrant,
This carries fire in the tail.
Away with me then,
The time draws on,
I must remove so insolent a Suitor,
And if he be so rich, make him pay ransom
Ere he see Bruges towers again: thus wise men
Repair the hurts they take by a disgrace,
And piece the Lyons skin with the Foxes case.
I am glad I have heard this sport yet.
Ther's for thy drink; come pay the house within boys,
And loose no time.
Away with all our hast too. 
No wind blow fair yet? no return of moneys?
Letters? nor any thing, to hold my hopes up?
Why then it is destined, that I fall, fall miserably,
My credit I was built on, sinking with me.
Thou boisterous North-wind, blowing my mis-fortunes,
And frosting all my hopes to cakes of coldness,
Yet stay thy fury: give the gentle South
Yet leave to court those sails that bring me safety,
And you auspicious fires, bright twins in heaven
Dance on the shrouds: he blows still, stubbornly,
And on his boisterous rack rides my sad ruin;
There is no help, there can be now no comfort,
To morrow with the Sun-set sets my credit.
Oh misery! thou curse of man, thou plague,
In the midst all our strength thou strik'st us;
My virtuous Love is tossed too: all, what I have been,
No more hereafter to be seen then shadow;
To prison now? well, yet ther's this hope left me,
I may sink fairly under this days venture
And so to morrow's crossed, and all those curses:
Yet manly I'll invite my fate, base fortune
Shall never say, she has cut my throat in fear.
This is the place his challenge called me too,
And was a happy one at this time for me,
For let me fall before my foe in the field,
And not at Bar, before my Creditors,
He's kept his word: now Sir, your swords tongue only
Loud as you dare, all other language???
Well Sir,
You shall not be long troubled: draw.
It is done Sir,
And now have at ye.
Now.
Betrayed to Villains?
Slaves ye shall buy me bravely,
And thou base coward.
Now upon 'em bravely,
Conjure 'em soundly boys.
Hold, hold.
Lay on still,
Down with that Gentleman rogue, swinge him to sirrup:
Retire Sir, and take breath: follow and take him,
Take all, it is lawfell prize.
We yield.
Down with 'em
Into the wood, and refile 'em, tew 'em, swinge 'em,
Knock me their brains into their breeches. 
Hold, hold.
What these men are I know not, nor for what cause
They shou???d thus thrust themselves into my danger,
Can I imagine. But sure heavens hand was in it,
Nor why this coward knave should deal so basely
To eat me up with slaves: but heaven, I thank thee,
I hope thou hast reserved me to an end
Fit for thy creature, and worthy of thine honour:
Would all my other dangers here had suffered,
With what a joyful heart should I go home then?
Where now, heaven knows, like him that waits his sent??ce
Or hears his passing bell; but ther's my hope still.
Blessing upon you Master.
Thank ye; leave me,
For by my troth I have nothing now to give thee.
Indeed I do not ask Sir, only it grieves me
To see ye look so sad; now goodness keep ye
From troubles in your mind.
If I were troubled
What could thy comfort do? prithee Clause, leave me.
Good Master be not angry; for what I say
Is out of true love to ye..
I know thou love me.
Good Mr. blame that love then, if I prove so saucy
To ask ye why ye are sad.
Most true, I am so,
And such a sadness I have got will sink me.
Heaven shield it, Sir.
Faith thou must loose thy Master.
I had rather loose my neck Sir: would I knew???
What would the knowledge do thee good, so miserable,
Thou can not help thy self? when all my ways
Nor all the friends I have???
You do not know Sir,
What I can doe: cures sometimes, for men's cares
Flow, where they least expect 'em.
I know thou would doe,
But fare-well Clause, and pray for thy poor Master.
I will not leave ye.
How?
I dare not leave ye,
And till ye beat me dead, I must not leave ye.
By what ye hold most precious, by heavens goodness,
As your fair youth may prosper, good Sir tell me:
My mind believes yet something's in my power
May ease you of this trouble.
I will tell thee
For a hundred thousand crowns upon my credit,
Taken up of Merchants to supply my traffiques,
The winds and weather envying of my fortune,
And no return to help me off, yet showing
To morrow, Clause, to morrow, which must come
In spron, thou shalt find me poor, and broken.
I cannot blame your grief Sir.
Now, what say thou?
I say you should not shrink, for he that gave ye,
Can give you more; his power can bring ye off Sir,
When friends and all forsake ye, yet he sees you.
That's all my hope.
Hope still Sir, are you tide
Within the compass of a day, good Master,
To pay this mass of money?
Even to morrow;
But why do I stand mocking of my misery?
Is it not enough the floods, and friends forget me?
Will no less serve?
What if it would?
Your patience,
I do not ask to mock ye: it is a great sum,
A sum for mighty men to start, and stick at;
But not for honest: have ye no friends left ye,
None that have felt your bounty? worth this duty?
Duty? thou know it not.
It is a duty,
And as a duty, from those men have felt ye,
Should be returned again: I have gained by ye,
A daily ???lmes these seven years you have showered me,
Will half??? supply your want.
Why dost thou fool me?
Can thou work miracles?
To save my Master,
I can work this.
Thou wilt make me angry with thee.
For doing good?
What power hast thou?
Enquire not:
So I can do it, to preserve my Master;
Nay if it be three parts.
O that I had it,
But good Clause, talk no more, I feel thy charity,
As thou has felt mine: but alas!
Distrust not.
It is that that quenches ye: pull up your spirit,
Your good, your honest, and your noble spirit;
For if the fortunes often thousand people
Can save ye, rest assured; you have forgot Sir,
The good ye did, which was the power you gave me;
Ye shall now know the King of Beggars treasure:
And let the winds blow as they please, the Seas roar,
Yet, here to morrow, you shall find your harbour,
Here fail me not, for if I live I'll fit ye.
How fine I would believe thee.
If I lie Master,
Believe no man hereafter.
I will try thee,
But he knows, that knows all.
Know me to morrow,
And if I know not how to cure ye, kill me;
So pass in peace, my best, my worthiest Master. 
Thus have I stolen away disguised from Hemskirck
To try these people, for my heart yet tells me
Some of these Beggars, are the men I look for
Appearing like my self, they have no reason
(Though my intent is fair, my maine end honest)
But to avoid me narrowly, that face too,
That women's face, how near it is: ?? may it
But prove the same, and fortune how I'll bless thee;
Thus, sure they cannot know me, or suspect me,
If to my habit I but change my nature;
As I must do; this is the wood they live in,
A place fit for concealment: where, 'till fortune
Crown me with that I seek, I'll live amongst 'em. 
Come bring 'em out, for here we sit in justice:
Give to each one a cudgel, a good cudgel:
And now attend your sentence, that you are rogues,
And mischievous base rascals, (ther's the point now)
I take it, is confessed.
Deny it if you dare knaves.
We are Rogues Sir.
To amplify the matter then rogues as ye are,
And lamb'd, ye shall be ere we leave ye.
Yes Sir.
And to the open handling of our justice,
Why did ye this upon the proper person
Of our good Master? were you drunk when you did it?
Yes indeed were we.
You shall be beaten sober.
Was it for want you undertook it?
Yes Sir.
You shall be swinged abundantly.
And yet for all that,
You shall be poor rogues still.
Has not the Gentleman,
Pray mark this point Brother Prig, that noble Gentleman
Relieved ye often, found ye means to live by,
By employing some at Sea, some here; some there;
According to your callings?
It is most true Sir.
Is not the man, an honest man?
Yes truly.
A liberal Gentleman? and as ye are true rascals
Tell me but this, have ye not been drunk, and often,
At his charge?
Often, often.
Ther's the point then,
They have cast themselves, brother Prig.
A shrewed point Brother.
Brother, proceed you now; the cause is open,
I am some what weary.
Can you do these things?
You most abominable stinking Rascals,
You turnip-eating Rogues.
We are truly sorry.
Knock at your hard harts Rogues, and presently
Give us a sign you feel compunction,
Every man up wed's cudgel, and on his neighbour
Bestow such alms, 'till we shall say sufficient,
For there your sentence lies without partiality;
Either of head, or hide, Rogues, without sparing,
Or we shall take the pains to beat you dead else:
You shall know your doom.
One, two, and three about it.
That fellow in the blew, has true compunction,
He beats his fellows bravely, oh, well struck boys,
Up with that blew breech, now plays he the Devil,
So get ye home, drink small beer, and be honest;
Call in the Gentleman.
Do, bring him presently,
His cause I'll hear my self.
Prig. With all due reverence,
We do resign Sir.
Now huffing Sir, what's your name?
What's that to you Sir?
It shall be ere we part.
My name is Hemskirk,
I follow the Earl, which you shall feel.
No threatening,
For we shall cool you Sir; why did thou basely
Attempt the murder of the Merchant Go swine?
What power hast thou to ask me?
I will know it.
Or flea thee till thy pain discover it.
He did me wrong, base wrong.
That cannot save ye,
Who sent ye hither? and what further villainies
Have ye in hand?
Why would thou know? what profit,
If I had any private way, could rise
Out of my knowledge, to do thee commodity?
Be sorry for what thou hast done, and make amends fool
I'll talk no further to thee: nor these rascals.
Tie him to that tree.
I have told you whom I follow.
The Devil you should do, by your villainies,
Now he that has the best way, wring it from him.
I undertake it: turn him to the Sun boys;
Give me a fine sharpe rush, will ye confess yet?
Ye have robed me already, now you'll murder me
Murder your nose a little: does your head purge Sir?
To it again, twill do ye good.
Oh,
I cannot tell you any thing.
Proceed then.
Ther's maggots in your nose, I'll fetch em out Sir.
O my head breaks.
The best thing for the rheum Sir,
That falls into your worships eyes.
Hold, hold.
Speak then.
I know not what.
It lies in 's brain yet,
In lumps it lies, I'll fetch it out the finest;
What pretty faces the fool makes? heigh!
Hold,
Hold, and I'll tell ye all, look in my doublet;
And there within the lining in a paper,
You shall find all.
Go fetch that paper hither,
And let him loose for this time.
Good even my honest feiends.
Good even good fellow.
May a poor huntsman, with a merry hart,
A voice shall make the forest ring about him,
Get leave to live amongst ye? true as steel, boys?
That knows all chases, and can watch all hours,
And with my quarter staff, though the Devil bid stand,
Deal such an alms, shall make him roar again?
Prick ye the fearful hare through cross ways, sheep walks
And force the crafty Reimald climb the quiksetts;
Rouse ye the lofty Stag, and with my bell-horne,
Ring him a knell, that all the woods shall morn him,
'Till in his funeral tears, he fall before me?
The Polcat, Marterne, and the rich skinned Lucerne,
I know to chase, the Roe, the wind out-stripping
Isgrin himself, in all his bloody anger;
I can beat from the bay, and the wild Sounder
Single, and with my armed staff, turn the Boar,
Spite of his fomy tushes, and thus strike him;
'Till he fall down my feast.
A goodly fellow.
What make thou here, ha?
We accept thy fellowship.
Hemskirck, thou art not right I fear, I fear thee.
Here is the paper: and as he said we found it.
Give me it, I shall make a shift yet, old as I am
To find your knavery: you are sent here, Sir
To discover certain Gentlemen, a spy-knave
And if ye find 'em, If not by persuasion
To bring 'em back, by poison to dispatch 'em.
By poison, ha?
Here is an other, Hubert;
What is that Hubert Sir?
You may perceive there.
I may perceive a villainy and a rank one,
Was he joined partner of thy knavery?
No.
He had an honest end, would I have had so,
Which makes him scope such cut throats.
So it seems,
For here thou art commanded, when that Hubert
Has done his best and worthiest service, this way
To cut his throat, for here he's set down dangerous.
This is most impious.
I am glad we have found ye,
Is not this true?
Yes? what are you the better;
You shall perceive Sir, ere you get your freedom:
Take him aside, and friend, we take thee to us,
Into our company, thou dare be true unto us?
I, and obedient too?
As you had bred me.
Then take our hand: thou art now a servant to us,
Welcome him all.
Stand off, stand off: I'll do it,
We bid ye welcome three ways; first for your person,
Which is a promising person, next for your quality,
Which is a decent, and a gentle quality,
Last for the frequent means you have to feed us,
You can steal it is to be presumed.
Yes, venson,
Or if I want ???
It is well you understand right,
And shall learn daily: you can drink too?
Soundly.
And ye dare know a woman from a weathercock?
Yes, if I handle her.
Now swear him.
You are welcome Brother.
Welcome, welcome, welcome, but who shall have the keeping
Of this fellow?
Thank ye friends,
And I beseech ye, if you dare but trust me;
For if I have kept wilde dogs and beasts for wonder,
And made 'em tame too: give into my custody
This roaring rascal I shall hamper him,
With all his knacks and knaveryes, and I fear me
Discover yet a further villainy in him;
O he smells rank 'oth rascal.
Take him to thee,
But if he scope???
Let me be even hanged for him,
Room Sir, I'll tie ye to my leash.
A way Rascal.
Be not so stubborn: I shall swindge ye soundly,
And ye play tricks with me.
Now swear him.
I crown thy nab, with a gag of benbouse,
And stall thee by the salmon into the clowes,
To mand on the pad, and strike all the cheats;
To mill from the Ruffmans, commission and states,
Twang dell's, in the stiromell, and let the Quire Cuffin:
And Herman Beck strine, and trine to the Ruffin.
Now interpret this unto him.
I power on thy pate a pot of good ale,
And by the Rogues oath a Rogue thee install:
To beg on the way, to rob all thou meets;
To steal from the hedge, both the shirt and the sheets:
And lye with thy wench in the straw till she twang,
Let the Constable, Justice, and Devil go hang.
So, now come in,
But ever have an eye Sir, to your prisoner.
He must blind both mine eyes, if he get from me.
Go, get some victuals, and some drink, some good drink
For this day we'll keep holly to good fortune,
Come and be frolic with us.
ye are a stinger. 
Indeed yae'r welcome: I have hard your scope,
And therefore give her leave, that only loves you;
(Truly and dearly loves ye) give her joy leave,
To bid ye welcome: what'ist makes you sad man?
Why do you look so wilde? is 't I offend ye?
Be shrew my heart, not willingly.
No Jertred.
Is it the delay of that ye' long have looked for,
A happy marriage? now I come to urge it:
Now when ye please to finish it.
No news yet?
Do you hear Sir?
Yes.
Do you love me?
Have I lived,
In all the happiness fortune could seat me,
In all men's fair opinions?
I have provided
A Priest, that's ready for us.
And can the Devil,
In one ten days, that Devil chance devour me?
We'll fly to what place you please.
No star prosperous?
All at a swoop?
You do not love me Goswin?
You will not look upon me?
Can men's prayers
Shot up to heaven, with such a zeal as mine are,
Fall back like lazy mists, and never prosper?
Geyves, I must wear, and cold must be my comfort;
Darkness, and want of meat; alas she weeps too,
Which is the top of all my sorrows, Jertred.
No, no, you will not know me; my poor beauty,
Which has been worth your eyes.
The time grows on still:
And like a tumbling wave, I see my ruin,
Come rolling over me.
Yet will ye know me?
For a hundred thousand crowns.
Yet will ye love me?
Tell me but how I have deserved your slighting.
For a hundred thousand crowns?
Farewell dissembler.
Of which I have scarce ten: ?? how it starts me.
And may the next you love, hearing my ruin.
I had forgot my self, ?? my best Gertred,
Crown of my joys, and comforts.
sweet what aisle ye?
I thought you had been vexed with me.
My mind wench,
My mind o'er flowed with sorrow, sunk my memory.
Am I not worthy of the knowledge of it?
And cannot I as well affect your sorrows,
As your delights? you love no other woman?
No I protest.
You have no ships lost lately?
None that I know of.
I hope you have spilt no blood: whose innocence
May lay this on your conscience.
Clear, by heaven.
Why should you be thus then?
Good Jertred, ask not,
Even By the love you bear me.
I am obedient.
Go in my fair; I will not be long from ye,
Nor long I fear me with thee, At my return
Despise me as you please.
The good gods guide ye. 
Now for my self which is the least I hope for,
And when that fails, for mans worst fortune, pity. 
WHy Gentlemen, it is but a week more I entreat you
But 7. short days, I am not runnig from ye,
Nor, if you give me patience, is it possible
All my adventures fail; you have ships abroad,
Endure the beating both of wind, or weather:
I am sure it would vex your hearts, to be protested
Ye are all fair Merchants,
Yes, and must have fair play;
There is no lying here else, one hours failing
Fails us of all our friends, of all our credits:
For my part I would stay; but my wants tell me,
I must wrong others in it.
No mercy in ye?
It is foolish to depend on others mercy:
Keep your self right, and even, out your cloth Sir,
According to your calling: you have lived here
In Lordlike prodigality; high, and open,
And now ye find what it is: the liberal spending
The summer of your youth, which you should glean in,
And like the labouring Ant, make use and gain of,
Has brought this bitter stormy winter on ye,
And now you cry.
Alas before your poverty,
We were no men, of no mark, no endeavour;
You stood alone, took up all trade, all business,
Running through your hands, scarce a sail at Sea,
But laden with your goods: we poor weak peddlers,
When by your leave, and much entreaty to it:
We could have stooge for a little cloth,
Or a few wines, put of and thank your worship
Lord, how the world's changed with ye? now I hope Sir,
We shall have sea-roome
Is my misery,
Become my scorn too? have ye no humanity,
No part of men left? are all the bounties in me
To you, and to the Town; turned my reproaches?
Well, get your monies ready: it is but 2. hours
We shall protest ye else, and suddenly.
But two days.
Not an hour, ye know the hazard. 
How soon my light's put out: hard hearted Bruges;
Within thy walls, may never honest Merchant
Venture his fortunes more: ?? my poor wench too;
Good fortune Master.
Thou mistake me Clause,
I am not worth thy blessing.
Still a sad man?
No belief gentle Master? come bring it in then,
And now believe your Beadesman.
Is this certain?
Or dost thou work upon my troubled sense?
It is gold Sir,
Take it and try it.
Certainly it is treasure,
Can there be yet this blessing?
Cease your wonder,
You shall not sink, for nev'r a soused Flap-dragon:
For ne'er a pickell'd pilcher of 'em all Sir,
It is there your full sum, a hundred thousand crowns,
And good sweet Master, now Be merry: pay 'em
Pay the poor pelting knaves, that know no goodness:
And cheer your heart up handsomely.
Good Clause,
How came thou by this mighty sum? if naughtily
I must not take it of thee, twill undo me.
Fear not: you have it by as honest means
As though your father gave it: Sir, you know not
To what a mass, the little we get daily,
Mounts in seven years; we beg it for heavens charity,
And to the same good, we are bound to render it.
What great security?
Away with that Sir,
Were not ye more then all the men in Bruges;
And all the money in my thoughts???
But good Clause,
I may dye presently.
Then this dyes with ye-
Pay when you can good Master, I'll no parchments,
Only this charity I shall entreat ye,
Leave me this Ring.
Alas, it is to poor Clause.
It is all I ask, and this with all, that when
I shall deliver this back, you shall grant me
Freely one poor petition.
There I confess it,
And may my faith forsake me when I shun it.
Away, your time draws on. Take up the money
And follow this young Gentleman.
Farewell Clause,
And may thy honest memory live ever.
Heaven bless ye and still keep ye, farewell Master.
I have locked my youth up close enough for gadding
In an old tree, and set watch over him.
Now for my Love, for sure this wench must be she,
She follows me; Come hither, pretty Minche.
No, no, you'll kiss,
So I will.
Y'ded law?
How will ye kiss me, pray you?
Thus: soft as my loves lips.
Oh!
What's your Fathers name?
He's gone to heaven.
Is it not Gerard, sweet?
I'll stay no longer,
My mother's an old woman, and my Brother
Was drowned at sea, with catching Cockles. O love:
O how my heart melts in me: how thou fir'st me!
It is certain she: pray let me see your hand, sweet,
No, no, you'll bite it.
Sure I should know that Gymmall;
It is certain he: I had forgot my ring too.
O Hubert, Hubert.
Ha? me-thought she named me???
Doe you know me, Chic?
No indeed, I never saw ye,
But me-thinks you kiss finely.
Kiss again then;
By heaven it is she.
O what a joy he brings me.
You are not Minche?
Yes pretty Gentleman,
And I must be married to morrow to a Copper.
Must ye my sweet, and doe's the Copper love ye?
Yes, yes, he'll give me pie, &amp; look in mine eyes thus:
Tic he: it is my dear Love; ?? blessed fortune.
How fain she would conceal her self? yet show it,
Will ye love me, and leave that man? I'll serve.
O I shall loose my self.
I'll waite upon ye,
And make ye dainty Nose-gayes.
And where will ye stick 'em?
Here in bosom, and make a crown of Lilies
For your fair head.
And will ye love me, deed-law?
With all my heart.
Call me to morrow then,
And we will have brave cheer, and go to Church together:
Give you good even Sir.
But one word fair Minche.
I must be gone a milking.
Ye shall presently.
Did you never hear of a young Maid called Jaculine?
I am discovered: hark in your ear, I'll tell ye;
You must not know me: kiss and be constant ever.
Heaven curse me else: tic she, and now I am certain
They are all here: now for my other project.??? 
Nay if it would do you courtesy.
None at all Sir;
Take it it is yours: ther's your ten thousand for ye,
Give in my Bills: your sixteen.
Pray be pleased Sir,
To make a further use.
No.
What I have Sir,
You may command; pray let me be your Servant.
Put your hats on: I care not for your courtesies,
They are most untimely don, and no truth in 'em.
I have a fraught of pepper.
Rot your pepper,
Shall I trust you again? ther's your seven thousand.
Or if you want fine sugar, it is but sending.
No, I can send to Barberry, those people
That never yet knew faith, have nobler freedoms:
These carry to Vanlock, and take my Bills in
To Peter Zuten these: bring back my Jewels;
Why are these pieces?
Health to the noble Merchant,
The Susan is returned.
Well?
Well, and rich Sir,
And now put in.
Heaven thou hast heard my prayers.
The brave Rebecca too: bound from the straights,
With the next tide is ready to put after.
What news of the fly-boate?
If this wind hold till midnight,
She will be here, and wealthy, escaped fairly.
How, prithee Sailor?
Thus Sir, she had fight
Seven hours together, with six Turkish Galleys,
And she fought bravely: but at length was borded:
And over laid with strength: when presently
Comes boring up the wind Captain Van-noke,
That valiant Gentleman, you redeemed from prison;
He knew the Boat, set in: and fought it bravely:
Beat all the Galleys off; sunk three, redeemed her,
And as a service to ye, sent her home Sir.
An honest noble Captain, and a thankful;
Ther's for thy new's: go drink the Merchants health, Sailor
I thank your bounty, and I'll do it to a doyt, Sir,
What miracles are powered upon this fellow?
This ye are I hope my friends, I shall scope prison,
For all your cares to catch me.
You may please Sir
To think of your poor servants in displeasure,
Whose all they have, goods, monies, are at your service.
I thank you,
When I have need of you I shall forget you:
You are paid I hope.
We joy in your good fortunes.
Come Sir, come take your ease you must go home
With me, yonder is one weeps and howls.
Alas how does she?
She will be better soon I hope.
Why soon sir?
Why when you have her in your arms, this night,
My boy she is thy wife
With all my hart I take her.
We have prepared, all thy friends will be there,
And all my Rooms shall smoke to see the revel;
Thou hast been wronged and no more shall my service,
Waite on the knave her Uncle, I have hard all,
All his baits for my Boy, but thou shalt have her;
Hast thou dispatch't thy business?
Most.
By the mass Boy,
Thou tumblest now in wealth, and I joy in it,
Thou art the best Boy, that Bruges ever nourished
Thou hast been sad, I'll cheer thee up with Sack,
And when thou art lusty I'll fling thee to thy Mistress.
She'll hug thee, sirha.
I long to see it,
I had forgot you: ther's for, you my friends:
You had but heavy burdens, commend my love
To my best love, all the love I have
To honest Clause, shortly I will thank him better. 
By the mass a royal Merchant,
Gold by the handful, here will be sport, soon Prig.
It partly seems so, and here will I be in a trice.
And I boy,
Away a pace we are looked for.
Oh these baked meates,
Me thinks I smell them hither.
Thy mouth waters. 
I Must not,
Why? it is in thy power to do it, and in mine
To reward thee to thy wishes.
I dare not, nor I will not.
Gentle Huntsman,
Though thou hast kept me hard: though in thy duty,
Which is required to do it, the hast used me stubbornly;
I can forgive thee freely.
You the Earls servant.
I swear I am near as his own thoughts to him;
Able to doe thee???
Come, come, leave your prating.
If thou dare but try.
I thank you heartily, you will be
The first man that will hang me, a sweet recompense,
I could do, but I do not say I will,
To any honest fellow that would think on it:
And be a benefactor.
If it be not recompensed, and to thy own desires,
If within these ten days I do not make thee???
What, a false knave?
Prithee, prithee conceive me rightly, any thing
Of profit or of place that may advance thee.
Why what a Goosecap would thou make me,
Do not I know that men in misery will promise
Any thing, more then their lives can reach at?
Believe me Huntsman,
There shall not one short syllable
That comes from me, pass
Without it's full performance.
Say you so Sir?
Have ye ever a good place for my quality.
A thousand Chases, Forests, Parks: I'll make thee
Chief ranger over all the games.
When?
Presently.
This may provoke me: and yet to prove a knave too.
It is to prove honest: it is to do good service,
Service for him thou art sworn to, for thy Prince,
Then for thy self that good; what fool would live here,
Poor, and in misery, subject to all dangers,
Law, and lewd people can inflict, when bravely
And to himself he may be law, and credit?
Shall I believe thee?
As that thou holdst most holy;
Ye may play tricks.
Then let me never live more.
Then you shall see Sir, I will do a service
That shall deserve indeed.
It is well said, hunts-man,
And thou shalt be well thought of.
I will do it: it is not your letting free, for that's mere nothing,
But such a service, if the Earl be noble,
He shall for ever love me.
What is it hunts-man?
Do you know any of these people live here?
No.
You are a fool then: here be those to have 'em,
I know the Earl so well, would make him caper.
Any of the old Lords that rebel'd?
Peace, all,
I know 'em every one, and can betray 'em.
But wilt thou doe this service?
If you'll keep
Your faith, and free word to me.
Wilt thou swear me?
No, no, I will believe ye: more then that too,
Here's the right heir.
O honest, honest hunts-man!
Now, how to get these Gallants, ther's the matter,
You will be constant, it is no work for me else.
Will the Sun shine again?
The way to get 'em.
Propound it, and it shall be done.
No slight;
(For they are Devilish crafty, it concerns 'em,)
Nor reconcilement, (for they dare not trust neither)
Must doe this trick.
By force?
I, that must doe it.
And with the person of the Earl himself,
Authority (and mighty) must come on 'em:
Or else in vain: and thus I would have ye do it.
To morrow-night be here: a hundred men will bear 'em,
(So he be there, for he's both wise and valiant)
And with his terror will strike dead their forces,
The hour be twelve a clock, now for a guide
To draw ye without danger on these persons,
The woods being thick, and hard to hit, my self
With some few with me, made unto our purpose,
Beyond the wood, upon the plain, will wait ye
By the great Ok.
I know it: keep thy faith hunts-man,
And such a shower of wealth???
I warrant ye:
Miss nothing that I tell ye.
No.
Farewell;
You have your liberty, now use it wisely;
And keep your hour, go closer about the wood there,
For fear they spy you.
Well.
And bring no noise with ye.
All shall be done to'th purpose: farewell hunts-ma??. 
Now, what's the news in town?
No news, but joy Sir;
Every man wooing of the noble Merchant,
Who has his hearty commendations to ye.
Yes, this is news, this night he's to be married.
By the mass that's true, he marries Vandoncks daughter
The dainty black-ey'd bell.
I would my clapper
Hung in his baldricke, what a peal could I ring?
Married?
It is very true Sir, ?? the pies,
The piping-hot mince-pyes.
O the Plum-pottage.
For one leg of a goose now would I venture limb boys,
I love a fat goose, as I love allegiance,
And???upon the Boors, too well they know it,
And therefore starve their poultry.
To be married
To Vandonks daughter?
O this precious Merchant:
What sport he will have? but hark ye brother Prig,
Shall we do nothing in the fore-said wedding?
Ther's money to be got, and meat I take it,
What think ye of a morise?
No, by no means,
That goes no further then the street, there leaves us,
Now we must think of something that must draw us
Into the bowels of it, into'th buttery,
Into the Kitchen, into the Cellar, something
That that old drunken Burgo-master loves,
What think ye of a wassell?
I think worthily.
And very fit it should be, thou, and Ferret,
And Ginks to sing the Song: I for the structure,
Which is the bowl.
Which must be up-sey English,
Strong, lusty London beer; let's think more of it,
He must not marry.
By your leave in private,
One word Sir, with ye; Gerard: do not start me,
I know ye, and he knows ye, that best loves ye:
Hubert speaks to ye, and you must be Gerard,
The time invites you to it.
Make no show then,
I am glad to see you Sir; and I am Gerard.
How stands affairs?
Fair, if ye dare now follow,
Hemskirke I have let go, and these my causes,
I'll tell ye privately, and how I have wrought him,
And then to prove me honest to my friends,
Look upon these directions; you have seen his.
Then will I speak a speech, and a brave speech
In praise of Merchants, whore's the Ape
???Take him,
A gouty Beare-ward stole him the other day.
May his Bears worry him, that Ape had paid it,
What dainty tricks? ???of that whoreson Bear-ward:
In his french doublet, with his bestirred bullions,
In a long stock tied up; o how daintily
Would I have made him waite, and change a trencher,
Cary a cup of wine? ten thousand stinks
Waite on thy mangy soul, thou lousy Bear-ward.
Tic passing well, I both believe and joy in it
And will be ready; keep you here the mean while,
And keep this in, I must a while forsake ye,
Upon mine anger no man stir, this two hours.
Not to the wedding sir?
Not any whither.
The wedding must be seen sir; we want meat too,
We be monstrous out of meat.
Shall it be spoken,
Fat Capon shook their tails it's in defiance?
And turkey toombs such honourable monuments,
Shall pigs, sir, that the Persons self would envy,
And dainty Ducks?
Not a word more, obey me. 
Why then come doleful death, this is flat tyranny
And by this hand ???
What?
Isle go sleep upon it. 
Nay, and there be a wedding, and we wanting
Farewell our happy days: we doe obey sir. 
Well met sir, you are for this lusty wedding.
I am so, so are you I take it.
Yes,
And it much glads me, that to doe him service
Who is the honour of our trade, and luster,
We meet thus happily.
He's a noble fellow,
And well becomes a bride of such a beauty.
She is passing fair indeed, long may their loves
Continue like their youths, in spring of sweetness,
All the young Merchants will be here
No doubt on it,
For he that comes not to attend this wedding
The curse of a most blind one fall upon him,
A loud wife, and a lazy: here's Vanlock.
Well overtaken gentlemen: save ye.
The same to you sir; save ye fair Mistress Francis,
I would this happy night might make you blush too.
She dreams a pace,
That's but a drowsy fortune.
Nay take us with ye too; we come to that end,
I am sure ye are for the wedding.
Hand and heart man:
And what their feet can doe, I could have tripped it
Before this whoreson gout
Bless ye Masters.
Clause? how now Clause; thou art come to see thy Master,
(And a good master he is to all poor people)
In all his joy, tic honestly don of thee.
Long may hee live sir, but my business now is
If you would place to doe it, and to him too.
He's here himself.
Stand at the door my friends?
I pray walk in: welcome fair Mistress Francis,
See what the house affords, ther's a young Lady
Will bid you welcome,
We joy your happiness. 
I hope It will be so: Clause nobly welcome,
My honest, my best friend, I have been careful
To see thy monies???
Sir, that brought not me,
Do you know this Ring again?
Thou had it of me.
And do you well reme??ber yet, the boon you gave me
Upon return of this?
Yes, and I grant it,
Be it what it will: ask what thou can, I'll do it;
Within my power.
Ye are not married yet
No,
Faith I shall ask you that that will disturb ye,
But I must put ye to your promise.
Do,
And if I faint and flinch in it???
Well said Master,
And yet it grieves me too: and yet it must be.
Prithee distrust me not.
You must not marry,
That's part of the power you gave me: which to make up,
You must presently depart, and follow me.
Not marry Clause?
Not if you keep your promise,
And give me power to ask.
Prithee think better,
I will obey, by heaven.
I have thought the best Sir.
Give me thy reason, dost thou fear her honesty?
Chaste as the ye, for any thing I know, Sir.
Why should thou light on that then? to what purpose?
I must not now discover.
Must not marry?
Shall I break now when my poor hart is pawned?
When all the preparation?
Now or never.
Come, it is not that thou would: thou dost but fright me
Upon my soul it is Sir, and I bind ye.
Clause, can thou be so cruel?
You may break Sir,
But never more in my thoughts, appear honest.
Did ever see her?
No:
She is such a thing,
O Clause, she is such a wonder, such a mirror,
For beauty, and fair virtue, Europe has not:
Why hast thou made me happy, to undo me?
But look upon her; then if thy heart relent not,
I'll quit her presently, who waits there?
Sir.
Bid my fair love come hither, and the company,
Prithee be good unto me; take a mans hart
And look upon her truly: take a friends hart
And feel what misery must follow this,
Take you a noble hart and keep your promise;
I forsook all I had, to make you happy.
Can that thing called a woman, stop your goodness?
Look there she is, deal with me as thou wilt now
Did ever see a fairer?
She is most goodly.
Pray ye stand still.
What ails my love?
Did thou ever,
By the fair light of heaven, behold a sweeter?
O that thou knew but love, or ever felt him,
Look well, look narrowly upon her beauties.
Sure he has some strange design in hand, he starts so.
This Beggar has a strong power over his plea???sure
View all her body.
It is exact and excellent.
Is she a thing then to be lost thus lightly?
Her mind is ten times sweeter, ten times nobler,
And but to hear her speak, a Paradise,
And such a love she bears to me, a chaste love,
A virtuous, fair, and fruitful love: it is now too
I am ready to enjoy it; the Priest ready: Clause,
To say the holy words shall make us happy,
This is a cruelty beyond mans study,
All these are ready, all our joys are ready,
And all the expectation of our friends,
Twill be her death to do it.
Let her dye then.
Thou can not: it is impossible.
It must be.
Twill kill me too, 'twil murder me: by heaven Claus
I'll give thee half I have; come thou shalt save me.
Then you must go with me: I can stay no longer
If ye be true, and noble.
Hard heart, I'll follow:
Pray ye all go in again, and pray be merry,
I have a weighty business, give my cloak there.
Concerns my life, and state; make no enquiry,
This present hour befallen me: with the soonest
I shall be here again: nay pray go in Sir,
And take them with you, tic but a night lost, Gentlemen.
Come, come in, we will not loose our meat yet,
Nor our good mirth, he cannot stay long from her
I am sure of that.
I will not stay; believe Sir. 
Gertrud, a word with you;
Why is this stop, Sir?
I have no more time left me, but to kiss thee,
And tell thee this, I am ever thine: farewell wench. 
And is that all your ceremony? Is this a wedding?
Are all my hopes and prayers turned to nothing?
Well, I will say no more, nor sigh, nor sorrow; oh me,
Till to thy face I prove thee false. 
LEad, if thou think we are right: why dost thou make
These often stands? thou said thou knew the way
Fsar nothing, I doe know it: would it were home???ward.
Wrought from me, by a Beggar? at the time
That most should tie him? Tic some other Love
That hath a more command on his affections,
And he that fetched him, a disguised Agent,
Not what he personated; for his fashion
Was more familiar with him, and more powerful
Then one that asked an alms: I must find out
One, if not both: kind darkness be my shroud
And cover loves too curious search in me,
For yet, suspicion, I would not name thee.
Mistress, it grows some-what pretty and dark.
What then?
Nay, nothing; do not think I am afraid,
Although perhaps you are.
I am not, forward.
Sure but you are: give me your hand, fear nothing.
There's one leg in the wood, do not pull backward:
What a sweat one on's are in, you or I?
Pray God it do not prove the plague; yet sure
It has infected me; for I sweat too,
It runs out at my knees, feel, feel, I pray you.
What ails the fellow?
Hark, hark I beseech you,
Doe you hear nothing?
No.
List: a wilde hog,
He grunts: now it is a bear: this wood is full of 'em,
And now, a wolf Mistress, a wolf a wolf,
It is the howling of a wolf.
The braying of an ass, is it not.
Oh, now one has me;
Oh, my left ham, farewell.
Look to your shanks,
Your breech is safe enough, the wolfe's a Fern-brake.
But see, see, see. There is a serpent in it,
It has eyes as broad as platters; it spits fire;
Now it creeps towards us, help me to say my prayers:
It hath swallowed me almost, my breath is stopped,
I cannot speak; do I speak Mistress? tell me.
Why, thou timorous Sot, can thou perceive
Any thing in the bush, but a poor glo-worme?
It may be tic but a glo-worm now, but twill
Grow to a fire-drake presently.
Come thou from it:
I have a precious guide of you; and a courteous
That gives me leave to lead my self the way thus.
It thunders, you hear that now.
I hear one hollow.
It is thunder, thunder:
See, a flash of Lightning:
Are you not blasted Mistress? pull your mask off,
It has plaid the barber with me here: I have lost
My beard, my beard, pray God you be not shaven,
Twill spoil your marriage Mistress.
What strange wonders,
Fear fancies in a Coward?
Now, the earth opens.
Prithee hold thy peace.
Will you on then?
Both love and jealousy have made me bold,
Where my fate leads me, I must go. 
God be with you then.
It was the fellow sure, he that should guide me,
The hunts-man that did hollow us.
Best make a stand
And listen to his next: ha?
Who goes there?
Mistress, I am taken.
Mistress? look forth soldiers.
What are you sirha?
Truly all is left
Of a poor Boor, by day-light, by night no body,
You might have spared your drum, and guns, &amp; pikes too
For I am none that will stand out Sir, I.
You may take me in with a walking stick
Even when you please, and hold me with a pack-threed.
What woman was it you called to.
Woman? none Sir.
None? did you not name Mistress?
Yes, but shoe's
No woman yet! she should have been this night,
But that a Beggar stole away her Bridegroom,
Whom we were going to make hue and cry after;
I tell you true Sir, she should ha'bin married to day,
And was the Bride, and all; but in came Clause,
The old lame Beggar, and whips up Mr. Goswin;
Under his arm; away with him as a Kite,
Or an old Fox, would swoop a way a gosling.
It is she, it is she, it is she, Niece?
Ha?
She Sir,
This was a noble entrance to your fortune,
That being on the point thus to be married:
Upon her venture here: you should surprise her.
I begin Hemskirck, to believe my fate,
Works to my ends.
Yes Sir, and this adds trust,
Unto the fellow our guide, who assured me Floris,
Lived in some Merchants shop, as Gerard did:
In the old beggars, and that he would use
Him for the train, to call the other forth,
All which we find is done???That's he again??? 
Good we sent out to meet him.
Heir's the Ok.
O I am miserably lost, thus fallen
Into my uncles hands from all my hopes,
Can I not think away my self and dye?
O I am miserably lost; thus fallen
Into my Uncles hands, from all my hopes:
No matter now, where thou be false or no,
Goswin, whether thou love an other better;
Or me alone; or where thou keep thy vow,
And word, or that thou come, or stay: for I
To thee from henceforth, must be ever absent,
And thou to me: no more shall we come near,
To tell our selves, how bright each other eyes were,
How soft our language, and how sweet our kisses,
Whilst we made one our food, the other our feast,
Not mix our souls by sight, or by a letter
Hereafter, but as small relation have,
As two new gon to in habiting a grave:
Can I not think away my self and dye?
I like your habits well: they are safe, stand close
But what's the action we are for now? ha?
Robbing a Ripper of his fish?
Or taking,
A poultrer prisoner, without ransom, Bullies?
Or cutting off a convoy of butter?
Or surprising a Boors ken, for granting cheats?
Or cackling cheats?
Or mergery-praters, Rogers,
And Tibs of the the Buttry?
Of I could drive a Regiment
Of geese before me, such a night as this
Ten leagues with my hat, and staff, and not a hiss
Heard, or a wing of my troops disordered.
Tell us,
If it be milling of a lag of duds,
The fetching of a back of clothes or so;
We are horribly out of linen.
No such matter.
Let me alone for any Farmers dog,
If you have a mind to the cheese-loft: it is but thus:
And he is a silenced Mastiff, during pleasure.
Would it would please you to be silent.
Mum.
Who's there?
A friend, the Huntsman.
O it is he.
I have kept touch Sir, which is the Earl of these?
Will ye know a man now?
This my Lord's the friend,
Hath undertook the service.
If 't be worth
His Lordships thanks anon, when it is done
Lording, I'll look for it, a rude woodman,
I know how to pitch my toils, drive in my game:
And I have don't, both Floriz and his Father
Old Gerard, with Lord Arnold of Benthuisen,
Cozen, and Jaqueline, young Floris Sister;
I have 'em all.
Thou speak too much, too happy,
To carry faith with it.
I can bring you
Where you shall see, and find 'em.
We will double,
What ever Hemskirck then hath promised thee.
And I'll deserve it treble; what horse ha you?
A hundred.
That's well: ready to take
Upon surprise of 'em?
Yes.
Divide then,
Your force into five Squadrous; for there are
So many out lets, ways, thorough the wood,
That issue from the place: where they are lodged;
Five several ways, of all which passages
We must posses our selves, to round 'em in,
For by one starting hole, they'll all escape else;
I and 4. Boors here, to me will be guides,
The Squadron, where you are, my self will lead:
And that they may be more secure, I'll use
My wonted whoops, and hollows, as I were
A hunting for 'em; which will make them rest,
Careless of any noise, and be a direction
To the other guides, how we approach 'em still.
It is ordered well, and relishes the Soldier,
Make the division Hemskirck: you are my charge
Fair one, I'll look to you.
Shall no body need
To look to me? I'll look unto my self.
It is but this, remember.
Say it is don boy. 
By this time Sir I hope you want no reasons
Why I broke off your marriage, for though I
Should as a Subject study you my Prince
In things indifferent, it will not therefore
Discredit you, to acknowledge me your Father,
By harkening to my necessary counsels.
Acknowledge you my Father? Sir I do,
And may impiety, conspiring with
My other Sins, sink me, and suddenly
When I forget to pay you a Sons duty
In my obedience, and that helped forth
With all the cheerfulness.
I pray you rise,
And may those powers that see and love this in you,
Reward you for it: Taught by your example
Having received the rights due to a Father,
I tender you the elegance of a Subject:
Which as my Prince accept of.
Kneel to me?
May mountains first fall down beneath their valleys,
And fire no more mount upwards, when I suffer
An act in nature so preposterous;
I mu???t overcome in this, in all things else
The victory be yours: could you here read me,
You should perceive how all my faculties
Triumph in my blessed fate, to be found yours;
I am your son, your son Sir, and am prouder
To be so, to the Father, to such goodness
(Which heaven be pleased, I may inherit from you)
Then I shall ever of those specious titles
That plead for my succession in the Earldom
(Did I possess it now) left by my mother.
I do believe it: but???
O my loved Father,
Before I knew you were so, by instinct,
Nature had taught me, to look on your wants,
Not as a strangers: and I know not how,
What you called charity, I thought the payment
Of some religious debt, nature stood bound for;
And last of all, when your magnificent bounty
In my low ebb of fortune, had brought in
A flood of blessings, though my threatening wants
And fear of their effects, still kept me stupid,
I soon found out, it was no common pity
That lead you to it.
Think of this hereafter
When we with joy may call it to remembrance,
There will be a time, more opportune, then now
To end your story, with all circumstances,
I add this only: when we fled from Woolfort
I sent you into England, and there placed you
With a brave Flanders Merchant, called rich Goswin,
A man supplied by me unto that purpose,
As bound by oath never to discover you,
Who dying, left his name and wealth unto you
As his reputed Son, and yet received so;
But now, is Floras, and a Prince, remember
The countries, and the subjects general good
Must challenge the first part in your affection:
The fair maid, whom you chose to be your wife,
Being so far beneath you, that your love
Must grant shoe's not your equal.
In descent
Or borrowed glories, from dead Ancestors,
But for her beauty, chastity, and all virtues
Ever remembered in the best of women,
A Monarch might receive from her, not give,
Though she were his Crowns purchase; In this only
Be an indulgent Father: in all else,
Use my authority.
Sir, here be two of 'em,
The Father and the Son, the rest you shall have
As fast as I can rouse them.
Who's this? Woolfort?
I Cripple, your feigned crutches will not help you,
Nor patched disguise that hath so long concealed you,
It's now no halting. I must here find Gerard,
And in this Merch???nts habit, one called Floras
Who would be an Earl.
And is, were thou a subject.
Is this that Traitor Woolfo???t?
Yes, but you
Are they that are betrayed: Hemskirke;
My Goswin
Turned Prince? ?? I am poorer by this greatness,
Then all my former jealousies or misfortunes.
Gertrud?
Stay Sir, you were to day too near her,
You must no more aim at those easy accesses,
Less you can do 't in air, without a head,
Which shall be suddenly tri'de.
O take my heart, first,
And since I cannot hope now to enjoy him,
Let me but fall a part of his glad ransom.
You know not your own value, that entreat
So proud a fiend as Woolfort.
For so lost
A thing as Floras.
And that would be so
Rather then she should stoop again to thee;
There is no death, butt's sweeter then all life,
When VVoolfort is to give it: O my Gertrude,
It is not that, nor Prince dome that I go from,
It is from thee, that loss includes all.
I, if my young Prince knew his loss, hee would say so,
Which that he yet may chew on, I will tell him
This is no Gertrude, nor no Hemskirks Niece,
Nor Vandoncks daughter; this is Birth, Birth,
The heir of Brabant, she that cause the war,
Whom I did steal, during my treaty there,
For your minority, to raise my self;
I then fore-seeing it would beget a quarrel.
That, a necessity of my employment,
The same employment, make me master of strength,
That strength, the Lord of Flanders, so of Brabant,
By marrying her: which had not been to doe Sir,
She come of years, but that the expectation
First of her Fathers death, retarded it,
And since the standing out of Bruges, where
Hemskirke had hid her, till she was near lost:
But Sir, we have recovered her: your Merchantship
May break, for this was one of your best bottoms
I think
Insolent Devil!
Who are these, Hemskirke?
More, more, Sir.
How they triumph in their treachery?
Lord Arnold of Benthusin, this Lord Costin,
This Jaqueline the sister unto Floras.
All found? why here's brave game, this was sport-royall,
And puts me in thought of a new kind of death for 'em.
Hunts-man, your horn: first wind me Floras fall,
Next Gerrards, then his daughter Jaquelins,
Those rascals, they shall dye without their rights:
Hang 'em Hemskirke on these trees; Il'e take
The assay of these my self.
Not here my Lord,
Let 'em be broken up, upon a scaffold,
Twill show the better when their arbour's made.
Wretch art thou not content thou hast betrayed us
But mock us too?
False Hubert, this is monstrous.
Hubert?
Who, this?
Yes, this is Hubert, Woolfort,
I hope he he's helped himself to a tree.
The first,
The first of any, and most glad I have you Sir,
I let you go before, but for a train;
Is it you have done this service?
As your Hunts-man,
But now as Hubert; save your selves, I will,
The Woolf's a foot, let slip; kill, kill, kill, kill.
Betrayed?
No, but well caught and I the Huntsman.
How do you Woolfort? Rascal, good knave Wool:
I speak it now without the Rose, and Hemskirck,
Rogue Hemskirck, you that have no niece, this Lady
Was stolen by you, and tan by you, and now
Resigned by me, to the right owner here:
Take her my Prince.
Can this be possible,
Welcome my love, my sweet, my worthy love.
I have given you her twice: now keep her better &amp; thank
Lord Hubert, that came to me in Gerrards name,
And got me out, with my brave Boys, to march
Like Caesar, when he bred his Comentaryes,
So I, to end my Chronicle, came forth
Caesar Van-donck, &amp; veni, vidi, vici,
Give me my Bottle, and set down the drum;
You had your tricks Sir, had you? we have tricks too,
You stole the Lady?
And we led your Squadrons
Where they have scratched their legs a little, with brambles,
If not their faces.
Yes, and run their heads
Against trees.
It is Captain Prig, Sir.
And Coronell Higgen.
We have filled a pitt with your people some with legs
Some with arms broken, and a neck, or two
I think be loose.
The rest too, that escaped,
Are not yet out of the briers,
And your horses, Sir,
Are well set up in Bruges all by this time:
You look as you were not well Sir, and would be
Shortly let blood; do you want a scarf?
A halter.
It was like your self, honest, and noble Hubert:
Can thou behold these mirrors altogether,
Of thy long, false, and bloody usurpation?
Thy tyrannous proscription, and fresh treason:
And not so see thy self, as to fall down
And sinking, force a grave, with thine own guilt,
As deep as hell, to cover thee and it?
No, I can stand: and praise the toils that took me
And laughing in them dye, they were brave snares.
It were truer valour, if thou durst repent
The wrongs the hast don, and live.
Who, I repent?
And say I am sorry? yes, it is the fools language
And not foot Woolfort.
Woolfort thou art a Devil,
And speaks his language, oh that I had my longing
Under this few of trees now would I hang him.
No let him live, until he can repent,
But banished from our State, that is thy doom.
Then hang his worthy Captain here, this Hemskirck
For profit of the example.
No let him,
Enjoy his shame too: with his conscious life,
To show how much our innocence contemns;
All practise from the guiltiest, to molest us.
A noble prince.
Sir, you must help to join
A pair of hands, as they have don their hearts here,
And to their loves with joy.
As to mine own,
My gracious Sister, worthiest Brother:
I'll go before, and have the bon-fire made,
My fireworks, and flap dragons, and good backrack,
With a peck of little fishes, to drink down
In healths to this day.
Slight, here be changes,
The Bells have not so many, nor a dance, ???rig.
Our Company's grown horrible thin by it,
What think you Ferret?
Marry I do think,
That we might all be Lords now, if we could stand for it
Not I if they should offer it: I'll dislodge first,
Remove the Bush to another climate.
Sir, you must thank this worthy Burgomaster,
Here be friends ask to be looked on too:
And thanked, who though their trade, and course of life
Be not so perfect, but it may be bettered,
Have yet used me with courtesy, and bin true
Subjects unto me, while I was their King,
A place I know not well, how to resign.
Nor unto whom: But this I will entreat
Your grace, command them, follow me to Bruges;
Where I will take the care on me, to find
Some manly, and more profitable course
To fit them, as a part of the Republique.
Do you hear Sirs? do so.
Thanks to your good grace.
To your good Lordship.
May you both live long.
Attend me at Van-doncks, the Burgomasters. 
Yes, to beat hemp, and be whipped twice a week,
Or turn the wheel, for Crab the Rope-maker:
Or learn to go along with him, his course;
That's a fine course now, in the Common-wealth, Prig,
What say you to it?
It is the backwardst course,
I know in the world.
Then Higgen will scarce thrive by it,
You do conclude?
Faith hardly, very hardly.
Troth I am partly of your mind, Prince Prig.
And therefore farewell Flanders, Higgen will seek
Some safer shelter, in some other Climate:
With this his tattered Colony: Let me see
Snap, Ferret, Prig, and Higgen, all are left
O the true blood: what? shall we into England?
Agreed,
Then bear up bravely with your Brute my lads
Higgen hath prig'd the prancers in his days,
And sold good pennyworth; we will have a course,
The spirit of Bottom, is grown bottomless.
I'll mand no more, nor cant.
Yes, your sixpenyworth
In private, brother, sixpence is a sum,
I'll steal you any mans dog for
For Sixpence more,
You'll tell the owner where he is.
Tic right,
Higgen must practise, so must Prig to eat;
And write the Letter: and give the word, But now
No more, as either of these.
But as true Beggars,
As ere we were.
We stand here, for an Epilogue;
Ladies, your bounties first; the rest will follow,
For women's favours, are a leading alms,
If you be pleased look cheerely throw your eyes:
Out at your masks.
And let your beauties sparkle.
So may you near want dressings, Jewels, gowns
Still in the fashion.
Nor the men you love,
Wealth nor discourse to please you.
May you Gentlemen,
Never want good fresh suites nor liberty.
May every Merchant here see safe his ventures.
And every honest Citizen his debts in.
The Lawyers gain good Clients.
And the Clients good Council.
All the Gamesters here good fortune.
The Drunkards too good wine.
The eaters meat
Fit for their tastes and palates.
The good wives kind Husbands.
The young maids choice of Suitors.
The Midwives merry hearts.
And all good cheer.
As you are kind unto us and our Bush,
We are the Beggars and your daily Beadsmen,
And have your money, but the Alms we ask
And live by, is your Grace, give that and then
VV'eel boldly say our word is, Come again.

