TRust me my Lord Dorialus, I had mist of this if you had not called me, I thought the Princesses birth day had been to morrow.
Why, did your Lord∣ship sleep out the day?
I marvel what the Duke meant to make such an idle vow.
Idle, why?
Is it not idle, to swear to grant his Daugh∣la any thing she shall ask on her birth day? she may ask an impossible thing: and I pray heaven she doe not ask an unfit thing at one time or other; tic dan∣gerous trusting a mans vow upon the discretion on's daughter.
I wonder most at the Marquess her brother, who is always vehemently forward to have her de∣sires granted.
Hoe's acquainted with 'em before.
Shoe's doubtless very chaste and virtuous.
So is Leucippus her Brother.
Shoe's twenty year old, I wonder
She ask not a Husband.
That were a folly in her, having refused all the
Great Princes in one part of the world:
Sheele dye a Maid.
She may ask but one, may she?
A hundred times this day if she will;
And indeed, every day is such a day, for though
The Duke has vowed it only on this day,
He keeps it every day: he can deny
Her nothing.
Come fair Hidaspes, thou art
Duchess to day,
Art thou prepared to ask, thou know
My oath will force performance.
And Leucippus, if she now ask ought that shall,
Or would have performance
After my death, when by the help of heaven,
This Land is thine, accursed be thy race,
May cuery one forget thou art my son,
And so their own obedience.
Mighty Sir,
I doe not wish to know that fatal hour,
That is to make me King, but if I doe,
I shall most hastily (and like a son)
Perform your grants to all, chiefly to her:
Remember that you ask what wee
Agreed upon.
Are you prepared? then speak.
Most Royal Sir, I am prepared,
Nor shall my will exceed a Virgins bounds,
What I request shall both at once bring
Me a full content.
So it ever does:
Thou only comfort of my feeble age,
Make known thy good desire,
For I dare swear thou love me.
This is it I beg,
And on my knees. The people of your Land,
The Lycians, are through all the Nations
That know their name, noted to have in use
A vain and fruitless Superstition;
So much more hateful, that it bears the show
Of true Religion, and is nothing else
But a selfe-pleasing bold lasciviousness.
What is it?
Many Ages before this,
When every man got to himself a Trade,
And was laborious in that chosen course,
Hating an idle life, far worse then death:
Some one that gave himself to wine and sloth,
Which breed lascivious thoughts;
And found himself conioynd
For that by every painful man,
To take his stain away, framed to himself
A god, whom he pretented to obey,
In being thus dishonest, for a name
He called him Cupped. This created god,
Mans nature being ever credulous
Of any vice that takes part with his blood,
Had ready followers enough: and since
In every age they grew, especially
Amongst your Subjects, who doe yet remain
Adorers of that drowsy Deity:
Which drink invented: and the winged Boy,
(For so they call him) has his sacrifices.
These loose naked statutes through the Land,
And in every Village, nay the palace
Is not free from'em. This is my request,
That these erected obscene Images
May be plucked down and burnt: and every man
That offers to'em any sacrifice, may lose his life.
But be advised my fairest daughter, if he be
A god, he will express it upon thee my child:
Which heaven avert.
There is no such power:
But the opinion of him fills the Land
With lustful sins: every young man and maid
That feel the least desire to one another,
Dare not suppress it, for they think it is
Blind Cupids motion: and he is a god.
This makes our youth unchaste. I am resolved:
Nephew Ismenus, break the Statues down
Here in the palace, and command the City
Doe the like, let proclamations
Be drawn, and hastily sent through the Land
To the same purpose.
Sir, I will break down none my self,
But I will deliver your command:
Hand I will have none int, for I like it not.
Go and command it. Pleasure of my life,
Would thou ought else? Make many thousand suits,
They must and shall be granted.
Nothing else.
But go and meditate on other suites,
Some six days hence Isle give thee audience again,
And by a new oath bind my self to keep it:
Ask largely for thy self, dearer then life
In whom I may be bold to call my self,
More fortunate then any in my age,
I will deny thee nothing.
It was well done Sister.
How like you this request my Lords?
I know not yet I am so full of wonder,
We shall be gods our selves shortly,
And we pull'em out of heaven o'this fashion.
We shall have wenches now when we can
Catch'em, and we transgress thus.
And we abuse the gods once, tic a Justice
We should be held at hard meat: for my part,
Isle even make ready for mine own affection,
I know the god incensed, must send a hardness
Through all good women's hearts, and then we have
Brought our eggs and muskadine to a fair market:
Would I had gin an 100. poun for a toleration,
That I might but use my conscience in mine
Own house.
The Duke hoe's old and past it, he would
Never have brought such a plague upon the land else,
Tic worse then Sword and Famine:
Yet to say truth, we have deserved it, we have lived
So wickedly, every man at his livery, and would that
Would have sufficed vs: we murmurd at this
Blessing, that was nothing; and cried out to the
God for endless pleasures, he heard vs,
And supplied vs, and our women were new still
As we need'em: yet we like beasts still cried,
Poor men can number their wooers, give vs
Abundance: we had it, and this curse with all.
Byr'lady we are like to have a long Lent out,
Flesh will be flesh: now Gentlemen I had rather
Have angered all the gods then that blind Gunner.
I remember once the people did but flight him
In a sacrifice: and what followed?
Women kept their houses, grew good housewives,
Honest forsooth, was not that fine?
Wore their own faces,
Though they wear gay clothes without surveying:
And which was most lamentable,
They loved their husbands.
I doe remember it to my grief,
Young Maids were as cold as Cowcumbors,
And much of that complexion:
Bawds were abolished: and to which misery
It must come again.
There were no Cuckolds.
Well, wee had need pray to keep these
Devils from vs,
The times grow mischievous.
There he goes, Lord!
This is a sacrilege I have not heard of:
Would I were gilt, that I might not
Feel what follows.
And I too. You shall see within these
Few years a fine confusion in the country, mark it:
Nay, and we grow for to depose the Powers,
And set up Chastity again, well I ha done.
A fine new Goddess certainly, whose blessings
Are hunger and hard beds.
This comes of fulness, a sin too frequent with vs;
I believe now we shall find shorter commons.
Would I were married, some what has some savour
The race of Gentry will quite run out now,
Tic only left to husbands: if younger sisters
Take not the greater charity tic lawful.
Well, let come what will come,
I am but one, and as the plague falls,
Isle shape my self: If women will be honest, Isle be
Sound, if the god be not too unmerciful,
Isle take a little still where I can get it,
And thank him, and say nothing.
This ill wind yet may blow the City good,
And let them (if they can) get their own children,
They have hung long enough in doubt: but howsoe∣for, the old way was the surer, then they had'em.
Farewell my Lords, Isle even take up what
Rent I can before the day, I fear the year will fall out ill.
Weal with you Sir: And Love so favour vs,
As we are still thy servants. Come my Lords,
Lets to the Duke, and tell him to what folly
His doting now has brought him.
Come my children, let your feet,
In an even Measure meet:
And your cheerful voices rise,
For to present this Sacrifice
Lo great Cupped, in whose name,
I his Priest begin the same.
Young men take your Loves and kiss,
Thus our Cupped honoured is.
Kiss again, and in your kissing,
Let no promises be missing:
Nor let any May den here,
Dare to turn away her ear,
Unto the whisper of her Love,
But give Bracelet, Ring, or Glove,
As a token to her sweating,
Of an after secret meeting:
Now boy sing, to st•cke our hearts
Fuller of great Cupids darts.
Lovers rejoice, your pains shall be rewarded,
The god of love himself grieves at your crying;
No more shall frozen honour be rewarded,
Nor the coy faces of a maid denying.
No more shall Virgins sigh, and say we dare not,
For men are false, and what they doe they care not.
All shall be well again, then doe not grieve,
Men shall be true, and women shall believe.
Lovers rejoice, what you shall say henceforth,
When you have caught your Sweet-hearts in your arms,
It shall be accounted Oracle, and worth:
No more faint-hearted Girls shall dream of harms,
And cry they are too young: the god hath said,
Fifteen shall make a Mother of a Maid:
Then wise men, pull your Roses yet vnblowne,
Love hates the too ripe fruit that falls alone.
No more of this: here break your Rights for ever
The Duke commands it so; Priest doe not stare,
I must deface your temple, though unwilling,
And your god Cupped here must make a Scarcrow
For any thing I know, or at the best,
A dorne a Chimney-peece.
O Sacrilege unheard of!
This will not help it, take down the Images
And away with'em.
Priest change your coat you had best, all service now
Is given to men: prayers aboue their hearing
Will prove but bablings; learn to lye, and thrive,
Twill prove your best profession: for the gods,
He that lives by'em now, must be a beggar.
There's better holiness on earth they say,
Pray God it ask not greater sacrifice. Go home,
And if your god be not deaf as well as blind,
He will some smoke for it.
Sir —
Gentlemen there is no talking,
This must be done, and speedily;
I have Commission that I must not break.
We are gone, to wonder what shall follow.
On to the next Temple.
Am I then scorned? is my all-doing will
And power, that knows no limit, nor admits none,
Now looked into by less then gods? and weakened
Am I, whose Bow struck terror through the earth,
No less then Thunder, and in this, exceeding
Even gods themselves; whose knees before my Altars
Now shook off; and contemd by such, whose lives
Are but my recreation! anger rise,
My sufferance and my self are made the subject
Of sins against vs. Go thou out displeasure,
Displeasure of a great god, flying thy self
Through all this Kingdom: so we what ever evils
Proud flesh is taking of, amongst these Rebels;
And on the first heart that despise my Greatness,
Lay a strange miscry, that all may know
Cupids revenge is mighty; with his arrow,
Hotter then plagues or mine own anger, will I
Now Nobly right my self: nor shall the prayers
Nor sweet smokes on my Altars hold my hand,
Till I have left this a most wretched Land,
Cleophila, what was he that went hence?
Means your Grace now?
I mean that handsome man,
That something more then man I met at door.
Here was no handsome man.
Come, hoe's some one
You would preserve in private, but you want
Cunning to doe it, and my eyes are sharper
Then yours, and can with one neglecting glance,
See all the graces of a man. Who was it?
That went hence now?
That went hence now: I he.
Faith here was no such one as your Grace thinks,
Zoylus your Brothers Dwarf went out but now.
I think it was he: how bravely he past by:
Is he not grown a goodly Gentleman?
A goodly Gentleman Madame?
He is the most deformed fellow in the Land.
O blasphemy! he may perhaps to thee
Appear deformed, for he is indeed
Unlike a man: his shape and colours are
Beyond the Art of Painting; he is like
Nothing that we have seen, yet doth resemble
Apollo, as I oft have fancied him,
When rising from his bed he stirs himself,
And shakes day from his hair.
He resembles Apollos Recorder.
Cleophila, go send a page for him,
And thou shalt see thy error, and repent.
Alas what doe I feel, my blood rebels,
And I am one of those I used to scorn,
My mayden-thoughts are fled against my self,
I harbour Traitors in my Virginity,
That from my child-hood kept me company,
Is heavier then I can endure to bear:
Forgive me Cupped, for thou art a god,
And I a wretched creature; I have sinned,
But be thou merciful, and grant that yet
I may enjoy what thou wilt have me, Love.
Zoylus is here Madame.
Hoe's there indeed.
Now be thine own Judge; see thou worse then mad,
Is he deformed? look upon those eyes,
That let all pleasure out into the world,
Unhappy that they cannot see themselves.
Look on his hair, that like so many beams,
Streaking the East, sure light ore half the world.
Look on him all together, who is made
As if two Natures had contention
About their skill, and one had brought forth him.
Ha, ha, ha: Madame, though Nature
Hath not given me so much
As others in my outward show;
I bear a heart as loyal unto you
In this unsightly body (which you please
To make your mirth) as many others doe
That are far more be friended in their births:
Yet I could wish my self much more deformed
Then yet I am, so I might make your Grace
More merry then you are, ha, ha, ha.
Beshrew me then if I be merry;
But I am content whilst thou art with me:
Thou that art my Saint,
By hope of whose mild favour I doe live
To tell thee so: I pray thee scorn me not;
Alas, what can it add unto thy worth
To triumph over me, that am a Maid?
Without deceit, whose heart does guide her tongue,
Drowned in my passions, yet I will take leave.
To call it reason that I door on thee.
The Princess is besides her Grace I think,
To talk thus with a fellow that will hardly
Serve in the dark when one is drunk.
What answer wilt thou give me?
If it pleafe your Grace to jest on, I can abide it.
If it be jest, not to esteem my life,
Compared with thee: If it be jest in me,
To hang a thousand kisses in an hour
Upon those lips, and take 'em off again:
If it be jest for me to marry thee,
And take obedience on me whilst I live:
Then all I say is jest:
For every part of this, I swear by those
That see my thoughts, I am resolved to doe.
And I beseech thee, by thine own white hand,
(Which pardon me, that I am bold to kiss
With so unworthy lips) that thou wilt swear
To marry me, as I doe here to thee,
Before the face of heaven.
Marry you! ha, ha, ha.
Kill me or grant: wilt thou not speak at all?
Why I will doe your will for ever.
I ask no more: but let me kiss that mouth
That is so merciful, that is my will:
Next, go with me before the King in hast,
That is my will, where I will make our Peers
Know, that thou art their better.
Ha, ha, ha, that is fine, ha, ha, ha.
Madam, what means your Grace?
Consider for the love of heaven to what
You run madly; will you take this Viper
Into your bed?
Away, hold off thy hands:
Strike her sweet Zoylous, for it is my will,
Which thou hast sworn to doe.
Away for shame
Know you no manners: ha, ha, ha.
Thou know none I fear,
This is just Cupids Anger, Uenus look down mildly on vs: And command thy Son to spare this Lady once, and let me be in love with all: and none in love with me.
Is your Lordship for the wars this summer?
Timantus wilt thou go with me?
If I had a company my Lord
Of Fiddlers: Thou a Company?
No, no, keep thy company at home, &amp; cause cuckolds,
The wars will hurt thy face, theres no semsters,
Shoemakers, nor Taylors, nor almon milked morning,
Nor poacht eggs to keep your worship soluble,
No man to warm your shirt, and blow your roses:
Nor none to reverence your round lace breeches:
If thou wilt needs go, and go thus,
Get a case for thy Captain-ship, a shower will spoil thee else. Thus much for thee.
Your Lordships wondrous witty, very plea∣sant, believe it.
No news yet my Son?
Sir, there be divers out in search:
No doubt theyl bring the truth where hee is,
Or the occasion that led him hence.
They have good eyes then.
The Gods go with them:
Who be those that wait there?
The Lord Ismenus, your General, for his dispatch.
On•ph•n Wee have no use to employ your
Virtue in our war: now the province is well settled:
Hear you ought of the Marquis?
No Sir,
Tic strange hee should be gone thus:
This 5. days hee was not seen.
Isle hold my life, I could bolt him in an hour:
Wher's my Daughter?
About the purging of the Temples, Sir.
Shees chaste and virtuous; Fetch her to me,
And tell her I am pleased to grant her now
Her last request, without repenting me.
Be it what it will: she is wise Dorialus,
And will not press me farther then a Father.
I pray the best may follow: yet if your grace
Had taken the opinions of your people,
At least of such, whose wisdoms ever wake
About your safety, I may say it Sir,
Under your noble pardon: that this change
Either had been more honour to the Gods,
Or I think not at all. Sir the princess.
O my Daughter, my health!
And did I say my soul, I lyde not;
Thou art so near me, speak, and have what ever
Thy wise will leads thee too: had I a Heaven,
It were too poor a place for such a goodness.
Whats here?
An Apes skin stuffed I think, tic so plump.
Sir, you have past your word,
Still be a prince, and hold you to it.
Wonder not I press you, my life lies in your word,
If you break that, you have broke my hart, I must ask
Thats my shame, and your will must not deny me:
Now for Heaven be not for sworn.
By the Gods I will not,
I cannot, were there no other power,
Then my love called to a witness of it.
They have much reason to trust,
You have for sworn one of em out oath country already.
Then this is my request: This Gent:
Bee not ashamed, Sir:
You are worth a Kingdom.
In what?
In way of marriage.
How?
In way of Marriage, it must be so.
Your Oath is tide to heaven: as my love to him,
I know thou doest but try my Age,
Come ask again.
If I should ask all my life time, this is all still.
Sir I am serious, I must have this worthy man with∣out enquyring why; and suddenly, and freely:
Doe not look for reason or obedience in my words:
My Love admits no wisdom:
Only hast, and hope hangs on my fury.
Speak Sir, speak, but not as a Father,
I am deaf and dull to counsel: my inflamed blood
Hears nothing but my will,
For Gods sake speak.
Here is a brave alteration.
This comes of Chastity.
Will not you speak Sir?
The God begins his vengeance; what a sweet youth he has sent vs here, with a pudding ins belly?
O let me never speak,
Or with my words let me speak out my life;
Thou power abused great Love, whose vengeance now we feel and fear, have mercy on this Land.
How does your Grace?
Sick, very sick I hope.
Gods comfort you.
Will not you speak? Is this your royal word?
Doe not pull perjury upon your soul.
Sir, you are old, and near your punishment; re∣member.
Away base woman.
Then be no more my Father, but a plague,
I am bound to pray against: bee any sin
May force me to despair, and hang my self,
Bee thy name never more remembered King
But in example of a broken Faith,
And cursed even to forgetfulness:
May thy Land bring forth such Monsters as thy daughter is?
I am weary of my rage. I pray forgive me,
And let me have him, will you Noble Sir?
Mercy, mercy heaven:
Thou heir of all dishonour, shame thou not to draw
This little moisture left for life, thus rudely from me?
Carry that Slave to death.
For Heavens sake Sir, it is no fault of mine,
That she will love me.
To death with him, I say.
Then make hast Tyrant, or Isle be for him;
This is the way to Hell.
Hold fast, I charge you away with him.
Alas old man, Death hath more doors thē one,
And will meet him.
Dorialus, Pray see her in her Chamber,
And lay a guard about her:
The greatest curse the Gods lay on our frailties,
Is will and disobedience in our Issues,
Which wee beget as well as them to plague vs,
With our fond loves; Beasts you are only blessed
That have that happy dullness to forget
What you have made, your young ones grieve not you
They wander where they list, and have their ways
Without dishonour to you; and their ends,
Fall on em without sorrow of their parents,
Or after ill remembrance: Oh this Woman
Would I had made my self a Sepulchre,
When I made her: Nephew where is the prince?
Pray God hee have not more part of her baseness
Then of her blood about him,
Gent: where is hee?
I know not Sir.
Has his ways by him self, is too wise for my com∣panie.
I doe not like this hiding of him self,
From such society as his person:
Some of it ye needs must know.
I am sure not I: nor have known twice this ten days, which if I were as proud as some of em I should take scurvily, but hee is a young man:
Let him have his swinge, twill make him.
Theres some good matter now in hand:
How the slave gears and grins: the Duke is pleased.
Theres a new pair of Scarlet Hose now, and as much
Money to spare, as will fetch the old from pawn, a Hat and a Cloak to go out to morrow:
Garters and stockings come by nature.
Bee sure of this.
I durst not speak else Sir.
Leucippus thou art shot through with a shaft
That will not rankle long, yet sharpe enough
To sow a world of helpless misery
In this happy Kingdom, doest thou think
Because thou art a prince, to make a part
Against my power, but it is all the fault
Of thy old Father, who believes his Age
Is cold enough to quench my burning Darts,
But hee shall know ere long, that my smart loose,
Can thaw Ice, and inflame the witherd hart,
Of Nestor, thou thy self art lightly stroke,
But his mad love, shall publish that the rage
Of Cupped, has the power to conquer Age.
Why, whats the matter?
Have you got the spoil
You thirsted for. O tyranny of men! Lenc. I pray thee leave.
Your envy is Heaven knows,
Beyond the reach of all our feeble Sex:
What pain alas could it have been to you,
If I had kept mine honour? you might still
Have been a prince, and still this Countries Heir,
That innocent Guard, which I till now had kept,
For my defence, my virtue, did it seem
So dangerous in a State, that your self came to suppress it.
Dry thine eyes again, Isle kiss thy tears away,
This is but follic, tic past all help.
Now you have won the treasure,
Tic my request that you would leave me thus:
And never see these empty walls again,
I know you will doe so, and well you may:
For there is nothing in em thats worth
A glance, I loath my self, and am become
Another woman; One me thinks with whom
I want acquaintance.
If I doe offend thee; I can be gone,
And though I love thy sight, so highly do I prize thine own content, that I will leave thee.
Nay, you may stay now;
You should have gone before: I know not now
Why I should fear you: All I should have kept.
Is stolen: Nor is it in the power of man
To rob me farther: if you can invent
Spare not; No naked man fears robbing less
Then you doe: now you may for ever stay.
Why, I could doe thee farther wrong.
You have a deeper reach in evil then I:
Tic past my thought.
And past my will to act: but trust me I could doe it.
Good Sir doe, that I may know there is a
Wrong beyond what you have done me.
I could tell the world what thou hast done.
Yes you may tell the world
And doe you think I am so vain to hope
You will not: you can tell the world but this,
That I am a widow, full of tears in show,
My Husband dead: And one that loved me so
Hardly, a week forgot my modesty,
And caught with youth and greatness,
Gave my self to live in sin with you:
This you may tell: And this I doe deserve.
Why doest thou think me so base to tell?
These limbs of mine shall part
From one another on a wrack,
Ere I disclose; But thou doest utter words
That much asflict me: you did seem as ready
Sweet Bash as my self.
You are right a man: when they have witched vs into misery, poor innocent souls,
They lay the fault on vs:
But bee it so- For prince Leucippus sake
I will bear anything.
Come weepeno more.
I wrought thee to it, it was my fault:
Nay, see if thou wilt leave? Here, take this pearl,
Kiss me sweet Bash, and receiuet this purse.
What should I doe with these? they will not deck my mind.
Why keep em to remember me.
I must be gone, I have been absent long:
I know the Duke my Father is in rage,
But I will see thee suddenly again.
Farewell my Bash.
Gods keep you: Do you hear Sir: pray give me a point to wear.
Alas good Bash, take one, I pray thee where thou wilt.
Coming from you: This point is of as high Esteem with me, as all pearl and gold: nothing but good bee ever with or near you.
Fare thee well mine own good Bash;
I will make all haste.
Just as you are a Dozen I esteem you:
No more, does he think I would prostitute
My self for love: it was the love of these pearls
And gold that wanne me, I confess
I lust more after him then anyother,
And would at any rate if I had store,
Purchase his fellowship: but being poor,
Isle both enjoy his body and his purse,
And hee a Prince, ne'er think my self the worse.
Nay, you must back and show vs what it is,
That witches you out of your Honour thus.
Whose that?
Look there Sir.
Lady, never fly you are betrayed.
Leave me my tears a while,
And to my just rage give a little place:
What saucy man are you, that without leave,
Enter upon a Widows mournful house?
You hinder a dead man from many tears.
Who did deserve more then the world can shed,
Though they should weep themselves to Images:
If not for of me, yet of your self
A way, for you can bring no comfort to me.
But you may carry hence, you know not what.
Nay sorrow is infectious.
Thou thy self
Art grown infectious: would thou know my name?
I am the Duke, father to this young man
Whom thou corruptst.
Has he then told him all.
You doe her wrong Sir.
O he has not told. Sir I beseech you pardon
My wild tongue, directed by a weak distempord head, matted with grief: Alas I did not know
You were my Sovereign; but now you may
Command my poor unworthy life,
Which will be none I hope ere long.
All thy dissembling will never hide thy shame:
And were not more respecting Woman-hood in
General, then any thing in thee, thou should
Be made such an example, that posterity,
When they would speak most bitterly, should say,
Thou art as impudent as Bash was.
Sir, though you be my King, whom I will
Serve in all just causes: yet when wrongfully
You seek to take mine Honour, I will rise
Thus and defy you; for it is a Jewel
Dearer then you can give, which whilst I keep,
(Though in this lowly house) I shall esteem
My self aboue the Princes of the earth
That are without it. If the Prince your son,
Whom you accuse me with, know how to speak
Dishonour of me, if he doe not doe it,
The plagues of hell light on him, may he never
Govern this Kingdom: here I challenge him
Before the face of heaven, my Liege, and these,
To speak the worst he can: if he will lye,
To lose a women's fame, Isle say he is
Like you (I think I cannot call him worse.)
Hoe's dead, that with his life would have defended
My reputation, and I forced to play
(That which I am) the foolish woman,
And use my liberal tongue.
Is it possible! we men are children in our
Carriages, compared with women: wake thy self
For shame, and leave not her whose honour thou
Should keep safe as thine own, alone to free her self:
But I am pressed I know not how, with guilt,
And feel my conscience (never used to lye)
Loath to allow my tongue to add a lye
To that too much I did: but it is lawful
To defend her, that only for my love loved evil.
Tell me, why did you
stay here so long?
If I can urge ought from me but a truth, hell
Take me.
Whats the matter, why speak you not?
Alas good Sir, forbear
To urge the Prince, you see his shamefastness.
What does he say Sir? if you be a Prince
Show it, and tell the truth.
If you have lain with her tell your Father,
No doubt he has done as ill before now:
The Gentlewoman will be proud ont.
For Gods sake speak.
Have you done prating yet?
Who prates?
Thou know I do not speak to thee Ismenus:
But what said you Time. concerning my shamefastness?
Nothing I hope that might displease your
Highness.
If any of thy great, Great-grandmothers
This thousand years, had been as chaste as she,
It would have made thee honester. I stayed
To hear what you would say: she is by heaven
Of the most strict and blameless chastity
That ever woman was: (good gods forgive me)
Had Tarquin met with her, she had been kilt
With a Slave by her ere she had agreed:
I lye with her! would I might perish then.
Our Mothers, whom we all must reverence,
Could ne'er exceed her for her chastity,
Upon my soul: for by this light shoe's
A most obstinate modest creature.
What did you with her then so long Leucip?
Isle tell you Sir: You see shoe's beautiful.
I see it well.
Moved by her face,
I came with lustful thoughts,
Which was a fault in me:
But telling ttuth, something more pardonable,
(And for the world I will not lye to you:)
Proud of my self, I thought a Princes name
Had power to blow'em down flat of their backs;
But here I found a Rock not to be shook:
For as I hope for good Sir, all the battery
That I could lay to her, or of my person,
My greatness, or gold, could nothing move her.
Tic very strange, being so young and fair.
Shoe's almost thirty Sir.
How doe you know her age so just?
She told it me her self
Once when she went about to show by reason
I should leave wooing her.
She staines the ripest Virgins of the age.
If I had sinned with her, I would be loath
To publish her disgrace: but by my life
I would have told it you, because I think
You would have pardond me the rather:
And I will tell you father: By this light Sir,
(But that I never will bestow my self
But to your liking) it she now would have me,
I now would marry her.
How's that Leucippus!
Sir, will you pardon me one fault, which yet
I have not done, but had a will to doe, and I will tel it?
Be it what it will, I pardon thee.
I offered marriage to her.
Did she refuse it?
With that earnestness, and almost scorn
To think of any other after her lost Mate, that she
Made me think my self unworthy of her.
You have stayed too long Leucippus.
Yes Sir, forgive me heaven, what multitudes
Of oaths have I bestowed on lies, and yet they were officious lies, there was no malice in 'em.
She is the fairest creature that ever I beheld;
And then so chaste, tic wonderful! the more I look
On her, the more I am amazed.
I have long thought of a wife, and one I would have
Had, but that I was afraid to meet a woman
That might abuse my age: but here she is
Whom I may trust too; of a chastity
Impregnable, and approved so by my son:
The means of her birth will still preserve her
In due obedience; and her beauty is
Of force enough to pull me back to youth.
My son once sent away, whose riuall-shippe
I have just cause to fear, if power, or gold,
Or wit, can win her to me, she is mine.
Nephew Ismenus, I have new intelligence,
Your Province is unquiet still.
Ime glad ont.
And so dangerously, that I must send the
Pirnce in person with you.
Ime glad of that too: Sir will you dispatch
Vs, we shall wither here for ever.
You shall be dispacht within this hour,
Leucippus, never wonder nor ask, it must be thus.
Lady I ask your pardon, whose virtue I have
Slubberd with my tongue, and you shall ever be
Chaste in my memory hereafter;
But we old men often dote: to make amends for
My great fault, receive that Ring:
Ime sorry for your grief, may it soon leave you.
Come my Lords lets go.
Heaven bless your Grace.
One that had but so much modesty left, as to blush,
Or shrink a little at his first encounter,
Had been undone; where I come off with honour,
And gain too: they that never would be tracked
In any course, by the most subtle sense,
Must bear it through with frontlets impudence.
Gentlemen, this is a strange piece of Justice,
To put the wretched Dwarf to death because
She doted on him; Is she not a woman, and
Subject to those mad figures her whole Sex
Is infected with? Had she loved you, or you, or I,
Or all on's, (as indeed the more the merrier still
With them) must we therefore have our heads par'd
With a Hatchet? So she may love all the Nobility
Out ath Duke dome in a month, and let the raskals in.
You will not, or you doe not see the need
That makes this just to the world?
I cannot tell, I would be loath to feel it:
But the best is, she loves not proper men, we three
Were in wise cases else: but make me know this need.
Why yes: Hee being taken away, this base incontinence dyes presently, and she must see her shame and sorrow for it.
Pray God she doe: but was the Sprat behea∣ded, or did they swing him about like a chicken, and so break his neck.
Yes, he was beheaded, and a solemn justice made of it.
That might have been deducted.
Why how would you have had him did?
Faith I would have had him roasted like a war∣den in a browne paper, and no more talk ont: or a teather stuck in's head, like a Quail: or a hanged him in a Dog-coller: what should hee be beheaded? wee shall have it grow so base shortly, Gentlemen will be out of love with it.
I wonder from whence this of the Dwarfs first sprung?
From an old lecherous pair of breeches that lay upon a wench to keep her warm: for cer∣tainely they are no mans work: and I am sure a Mon∣key would get one of the guard to this fellow, he was no bigger then a small Portmantu, and much about that making, if t'ad legs.
But Gentlemen, what say you to the Prince?
I, concerning his being sent I know not whither.
Why then hee will come home I know not when: you shall pardon me, Isle talk no more of this subject, but say gods be with him where ere he is, and send him well home again: For why, hee is gone, or when he will return, let them know that directed him: Only this, there's mad Moriscoes in the state; but what they are, Isle tell you when I know. Come, lets go, hear all, and say nothing.
Content.
Timantus, is the Duke ready yet?
Almost.
What ails him?
Faith I know not, I think he has dreamt he's but eighteen: has been worse since he sent you forth for the frizling-yron.
That cannot be, he lay in Gloves all night, and this morning I brought him a new Periwig with a locke at it, and knocked up a swinge in's chamber.
O but since, his Taylor came, and they have fallen out about the fashion on's clothes: and yon∣ders a fellow come, has board a hole in's ear; and he has bespoke a Vauting-horse, you shall see him come forth presently: hee looks like Winter, stuck here and there with fresh flowers.
Will he not Tilt think you?
I think he will.
What does he mean to doe?
I know not: but by this light I think hee is in love; he would ha bin shau'd but for me.
In love, with whom?
I could guess, but you shall pardon me: hee will take me along with him some whither.
I ouer-heard him ask your opinion of some bodies beauty.
Yes, there it goes that makes him so youth∣full, and has laid by his Crutch, and halts now with a leading staff.
Timantus.
Sir.
This Feather is not large enough.
Yes faith, tic such a one as the rest of the young
Gallants wear.
Telamon, does it doe well?
Sir, it becomes you, or you become it, the rareliest —
Away, dost think so?
Think sir? I know it. Sir, the Princess is past all hope of life since the Dwarf was put to death.
Let her be so, I have other matters in hand: but this same Taylor angers me, he has made my doublet so wide: and see, the knave has put no points at my arm.
Those will be put too quickly Sir, upon any occasion.
Telamon, have you bid this Dancer come a mornings?
Yes Sir.
Timantus, let me see the glass again: look you how careless you are grown, is this tooth well put in?
Which Sir?
This Sir.
It shall be.
Me thinks that tooth should put him in mind on's years: and Timantus stands as if (seeing the Duke in such a youthful habit) he were looking in's mouth how old he were.
So, foe.
Will you have your Gown sir?
My Gown? why, am I sick? bring me my Sword.
Let a couple of the great horses be brought out for vs.
Heel kill himself. Why, will you ride sir?
Ride? Doft thou think I cannot ride?
O yes sir, I know it: but as I conceive your journey, you would have it private; and then you were better take a Coach.
These Coaches make me sick: yet tic no matter, let it be so.
Sir, heere's your sword.
O well sed: let me see it, I could me thinks. Why Telamon, bring me another: what, think thou I will wear a sword in vain?
He has not strenghth enough to draw it, a yoke of Fleas tide to a hair would have drawn it. Tic out sir now, the Scabbert is broke.
O put it up again, and on with it; me thinks I am not dressed till I feel my sword on.
Telamon, if any of my counsel ask for me,
Say I am gone to take the ayre.
He has not been dressed this twenty years then, If this vain hold but a week, hee will learn to play oath base viol and sing too't: Hes poetical already; For I have spied a Sonnet once making lye by's beds side, Isle be so unmannerly to read it.
Hes dead, hes dead, and I am following.
Ask Cupped mercy Madame.
O my hart!
Help! stir her:
ô, ô.
Shees going, wretched women that wee are:
Look to her, and Isle pray the while.
Why Madam?
Cupped pardon what is past,
And forgive our sins at last,
Then we will be coy no more,
But thy Deity Adore,
Troths at fifteen wee will plight,
And will tread a Dance each night,
In the Fields, or by the Fire,
With the youths that have desire.
How does she yet?
O ill:
Given Eare-rings we will wear,
Bracelets of our Lovers hair,
Which they on our Arms shall twist,
With their Names carved on wrist,
All the Money that wee owe,
Wee in Tokens will bestow:
And learn to write, that when tic sent,
Only our Loves know what it meant:
O then pardon what is past,
And forgive our sins at last.
What, Minds she?
Nothing, you do it not want only, you should sing
Leave, leave, tic now too late:
Why She is dead:
Her last is breathed.
What shall wedoe.
Go run,
And tell the Duke; And whilst Isle close her eyes.
Thus I shut thy faded light,
And put it in eternal night.
Where is she can boldly say
Though she be as fresh as May:
She shall not by this Corps be laid,
Ere to morrows light doe fade.
Let vs all now living bee,
Warned by thy strict Chastity.
And marry all fast as we can,
Till then we keep a piece of man,
Wrongfully from them that owe it
Soon may every Maid bestow it.
Who is it?
Forsooth theres a gallant Coach at the door,
And the brave old man int, that you said was the Duke.
Cupped grant hee may be taken.
Hee is coming up, and looks the swag∣geriugst, &amp; has such glorious clothes. Bac: Let all the house see me sad, and see all handsome.
Nay widow fly not back, we come not now to chide, stand up and bid me welcome.
To a poor widows house that knows no end
Of her ill fortune: your Highness is most welcome.
Come kiss me then, this is but manners wid∣dow: Ne'er fling your head aside, I have more cause of grief then you: my Daughters dead: but what? Tic nothing, is the rough French horse brought to the door? They say he is a high gore, I shall soon try his mettle.
Hee will be sir, and the gray Barberry, they are fiery both.
They are the better: Before the gods I am lightsome, very lightsome: How doest thou like me Widow?
As a person in whom all graces are,
Come, Come, ye flatter: Isle clap your cheek for that, and you shall not be angry.
Hast no Music? Now could I cut three times with ease, and doe a cross point, should shame all your gallants.
I doe believe you, and your self too: Lord what a fine old Zany my Love has made him? Is' mine, I am sure: Heaven make me thankful for him.
Tell me how old thou art, my pretty sweet heart?
Your Grace will not buy her, she may trip Sir?
My sorrow shows me Elder then I am by many years?
Thou art so witty I must kiss again.
In deed her Age lies not in her mouth: ne'er look it there Sir she has a better register, if it be not burnt.
I will kiss thee, I am a fire Timanthus.
Can you choose Sir, having such heavenly Fire before you?
Widow, guess why I come, I prithee doe.
I cannot Sir, unless you bee pleased to make a mirth out of my rudeness: and that I hope your pit∣tie will not let ye, the subject is so barren: Bite King Bite, Isle let you play a while.
Now as I am an honest man, Isle tell thee true∣lie, how many foot did I jump yesterday Timanthus?
Fourteen of your own, &amp; some three fingers.
This Fellow lies as lightly, as if hee were in cut Taffeta.
Alas good Almanac get thee to Bed, and tell what weather wee shall have to morrow.
Widow I am come in short to be a Suitor.
For whom?
Why by my troth, I come to woo thee wench: And win thee for my self: Nay, look upon me: I have about me that will doe it.
Now Heaven defend me, your whore shall never: I thank the Gods, I have a little left me to keep me warm, and honest: if your grace take not that, I seek no more.
I am so far from taking any thing, Isle add unto thee.
Such Additions may bee for your ease Sir, Not my honesty: I am well in being single, good Sir seek another, I am no meat for money.
Shall I fight for thee?
This Sword shall cut his throat, that dares lay claim
But to a Finger of thee, but to a look, I would
See such a fellow.
It would bee but a cold sight to you:
This is the father of S. George a foote-backe,
Can such dry Mumming talk.
Before the gods, your grace looks like AEncaes.
Hee looks like his old father upon his back,
Crying to get Aboard.
How shall I win thy love, I pray thee tell me?
Isle marry thee if thou desire that: That is an honest
Course, I am in good earnest, and presently within this hour, I am mad for thee: prithee deny me not,
For as I live Isle pine thee, but Isle have thee.
Now hes in the Toil, isle hold him fast.
You doe not know what tic to be a Queen,
Go to your Maid, else what the old man falls short of, theres others can each out, when you please to call on em.
I understand you not, Love I adore thee,
Sir, on my knees I give you hearty thanks, for so much
Honouring your humble Handmaid aboue her birth:
Far more her weak deservings. I dare-not trust the
Enuiou: tongues of all that must rapine at my vnwor∣thy rising.
Beside, you have many fair ones in your kingdom
Borne to such worth: ô turn your self about
And make a Noble choice.
If I doe, let me famish: I will have thee,
Or break up house, and board here.
Sir, you may command an unwilling woman to obey vee: but heaven knows —
No more: these half a dozen kisses, and this Jewel, and every thing I have, and away with me, and clap it up; and have a boy by the morning Timan∣tus. Let one be sent post for my son again: and for Ismenus, they are scarce twenty mile on their way yet, by that time weal be married.
There shall Sir.
Is not this a fine marriage?
Yes, yes, let it alone.
I, I, the King may marry whom's list, lets talk of other matters.
Is the Prince coming home certainly?
Yes, yes, hee was sent post for yesterday, lets make haste, weal see how his new Mother-in-law will entertain him.
Why well I warrant you: did you not mark how humbly she carried her self to vs on her marriage day, acknowledging her own unworthiness, and
that she would be our servant.
But mark whats done. Nis. regard not show
O God! I knew her when I have been offred her to be brought to my bed for five pound: whether it could have been performed or no, I know not.
Her daughters a pretty Lady.
Yes: and having had but mean bringing up, it talks the pretlest and innocentlest, the Queen will be so angry to hear her betray her breeding by her lan∣gauge: but I am persuaded shoe's well disposed.
I think better then her mother.
Come, we stay too long.
How now man, struck dead with a tale?
No, but with a truth.
Stand of your self: can you endure blows, and shrink at words?
Thou know I have told thee all.
But that ell's nothing to make you thus: your
Sisters dead.
Thats much, but not the most.
Why, for the other let her marry and hang, tic no purposed fault of yours: and if your father will needs have your cast whore, you shall show the duty of a child better in being contented, and bidding much good doe his good old heart with her, then in ripening thus at it: let her go: what, there are more wenches man, weal have another.
O thou art vain, thou know I do not love her:
What shall I doe? I would my tongue had led me
To any other thing, but Blasphemy,
So I had mist commending of this woman,
Whom I must reverence now, she is my mother;
My finn Ismenus has wrought all this ill:
And I beseech thee, to be warned by me,
And doe not lye, if any man should ask thee
But How thou dost, or, What a clock tic now,
Be sure thou doe not lye, make no excuse
For him that is most near thee: never let
The most officious falsehood scope thy tongue,
For they aboue (that are entirely truth)
Will make that seed, which thou hait fowne
Of lies, yield miseries a thousand sold
Upon thine head, as they have done of mine.
Sir, your Highness is welcome home, the Duke and Queen will presently come forth to you.
Isle weight on them.
Worthy Ismenus, I pray how have you sped in your wars?
This Rogue mocks me. Well Timantus, 'pray how have you sped here at home at shouelboord?
Faith reasonable. How many Towns have you taken in this Summer?
How many Stags have you been at the death of this grass?
A number. 'pray how is the province settled?
Prithee how does the dunne Nag?
I think you mock me my Lord.
Mock thee? Yes by my troth doe I: why what would thou have me doe with thee? Art good for any thing else?
My good Ismenus, hold me by the wrist:
And if thou see me fainting, wring me hard,
For I shall soon again else —
Welcome my son; rise, I did send for thee
Back from the Province, by thy Mothers counsel,
Thy good Mother here, who loves thee well:
She would not let me venture all my Joy
Amongst my enemies: I thank thee for her,
And none but thee, I took her on thy word.
Pinch harder.
And she shall bid thee welcome: I have now
Some near affairs, but I will drink a Health
To thee a non: Come Telamon, Ime grown
Lustier, I thank thee for it, since I married;
I can stand now alone, why Telamon,
And never stagger.
Welcome most noble sir, whose fame is come
Hither before you: out alas you scorn me,
And teach me what to doe.
No, you are my Mother.
Far unworthy of that name God knows:
But trust me, here before these Lords,
I am no more but Nurse unto the Duke;
Nor will I breed a faction in the State,
It is too much for me that I am raised
Unto his bed, and will remain the servant
Of you that did it.
Madame I will serve you
As shall become me. O dissembling woman!
Whom I must reverence though Take from thy
Quiver, suer-aymd Apollo, one of thy swift darts,
Headed with thy consuming golden beams,
And let it melt this body into mist,
That none may find it.
Shall I beg my Lords
This Room in private for the Prince and me?
What will she say now?
I must still enjoy him:
Yet there is still left in me a spark of woman,
That wishes hee would move it, but he stands,
As if hee grew there with his eyes on earth,
Sir, you and I when we were last together
Kept not this distance as we were afraid
Of blasting by our selves.
Madame tic true, Heaven pardon it.
Amen Sir.
You may think that I have done you wrong in this strange marriage,
Tic past now.
But it was no fault of mine:
The world had called me mad, had I refused
The King: nor laid I any train to catch him,
It was your own Oaths did it.
Tic a truth: that takes my sleep away, but
Would to Heaven, if it had so been pleased, you had
Refused him, though I had gratifide that curtsy
With having you my self: But since tic thus,
I doe beseech you that you will bee honest
From henceforth, and not abuse his credulous Age,
Which you may easily doe. As for my self
What I can say you know alas too well
Is tide within me, here it will sit like lead,
But shall offend no other, it will pluck me
Back from my entrance into any mirth,
As if a servant came, and whispered with me
Of some Friends death, but I will bear my self,
To you, with all the due obedience
A son owes to a Mother: more then this,
Is not in me, but I must leave the rest to the
Just gods: who in their blessed time,
When they have given me punishment enough,
For my rash sin, will mercifully find
As unexpected means to ease my grief
As they did now to bring it.
Grown so godly: this must not bee. And
I will be to you, no other then a natural Mother ought:
And for my honesty, so you will swear
Never to urge me, I shall keep it safe from any other.
Bless me I should urge you?
Nay but swear then that I may be at peace,
For I doe feel a weakness in my self,
That can deny you nothing, if you tempt me,
I shall embrace finn as it were a friend, and run to meet it
If you know how far
It were from me, you would not urge an Oath,
But for your satistaction, when I tempt you.
Swear not: I cannot move him, this sad talk
Of things past help, does not become vs well.
Shall I send one for my Musicians and weal dance?
Dance Madame.
Yes, Alaualta.
I cannot dance Madam.
Then lets be merry
I am as my Fortunes bid me.
Doe not you see me sour?
Yes.
And why think you I smile?
I am so far from any joy my self,
I cannot fancy a cause of mirth.
He tell you, we are alone:
Alone. Bac. Yes.
Tic true, what then?
What then? you make my smiling now
Break into laughter: what think you is to be don then?
We should pray to Heaven for mercy.
Pray, that were a way indeed
To pass the time, but I will make you blush,
To see a bashful woman teach a man
What wee should doe alone, try again
If you can find it out.
I dare not think I understand you.
I must teach you then; Come, kiss me.
Kiss you?
Yes, be not ashamed:
You did it not your self, I will forgive you.
Keep you displeased gods, the due respect
I ought to bear unto this wicked woman,
As she is now my Mother, Hast within me,
Least I add sins to sins, till no repentance will cure me.
Leave these melancholy moods,
That I may swear thee welcome on thy lips
A thousand times.
Pray leave this wicked talk,
You doe not know to what my Fathers wrong
May urge me.
I me careless, and doe weigh
The world, my life, and all my after hopes
Nothing without thy Love, mistake me not:
Thy Love, as I have had it, free and open
As wedlock is, within it self, what say you?
No-thing.
Pity me, behold a Duchess
Kneels for thy mercy, and I swear to you,
Though I should iye with you, it is no Lust,
For it desires no change, I could with you
Content my self: what answer will you give?
They that can answer must be less amazed,
Then I am now: you see my tears deliver
My meaning to you.
Shall I be contemd? thou art a beast, worse thē a savage beast,
To let a Lady kneel, to beg that thing
Which a right man would offer.
Tic your will Heaven: but let me bear me like
My self, how ever she does.
Were you made an Eunuch, since you went hēce? yet they have more desire then I can find in you:
How fond was I to beg thy love? He force thee to my will
Doest thou not know that I can make the King
Dote as my list? yield quickly, or by Heaven
Isle have thee kept in prison for my purpose,
Where I will make thee serve my turn, and have thee fed
With such meates as best shall sit my ends
And not thy health, why doest not speak to me?
And when thou doest displease me, and art grown
Less able to perform; then I will have thee
Killed and forgotten: Are you stricken dumb?
All you have named, but making of me sin
With you, you may command, but never that;
Say what you will, Isle hear you as becomes me,
If you speak, I will not follow your counsel,
Neither will I tell the world to your disgrace,
But give you the just honour
That is due from me to my Fathers wife.
Lord how full of wise formality you are grown
Of late: but you were telling me
You could have wished that I had married you,
If you will swear so yet, Isle make away the King.
You are a strumpet.
Nay, I care not
For all your Railings: They will Batter walls
And take in Towns, as soon as trouble me
Tell him, I care not, I shall undo you only, which is no matter.
I appeal to you still, and for ever, that are
And cannot be other, Madame I see tic in your power
To work your will on him: And I desire you
To lay what trains you will for my wished death,
But suffer him to find his quiet grave
In peace; Alas he never did you wrong,
And further I beseech you pardon me,
For the ill word I gave you, for how ever
You may deserve, it became not me
To call you so, but passion urges me
I know not whether my heart break now, &amp; ease me ever.
Pray you get you hence
With your goodly humour, I am weary of you extremely.
Trust me, so am I of my self too:
Madame, Isle take my leave; gods set all right.
A men, Sir get you gone;
Am I denied? it does not trouble me
That I have moved, but that I am refused:
I have lost my patience: I will make him know
Lust is not Love, for Lust will find a mate
While there are men, and so will I: &amp; more
Then one, or twenty: yonder is Timantus,
A fellow void of any worth, to raise himselse
And therefore like to catch at any evil
That will but pluck him up, him will I make
Mine own: Timantus.
Madam?
Thou know well
Thou were, by chance a means of this my raising:
Brought the Duke to me, and though it were but chase
I must reward thee.
I shall bend my service unto your Highness.
But doe it then entirely, and in every thing,
And'tell me, Could thou now think that thing
Thou would not doe for me?
Noc by my soul Madam.
Then thou art right.
Go to my Lodging, and Isle follow thee
With my instruction I doe see already,
This prin ce that did but now contemn me, dead:
Yet will I never speak an evil word
Unto his Father of him till I have wonnc
A belief I love him, but Isle make
His virtues his undoing, and my praises
Shall be so many swords against his breast,
Which once performed, Isle make Urania
My Daughter, the Kings heir, and plant my Issue,
In this large Throne: Nor shall it bee withstood,
They that begin in Lust, must end in blood.
Wee live to know a fine time, Gentle.
And a fine Duke, that through his doting age
Suffers him to be a child again
Under his Wives tuition.
All the Land holds in that tenor too: in wo∣mans service? sure we shall learn to spin.
No, thats too honest: we shall have other
Liberal Sciences taught vs too soon;
Lying, and Flattering, those are the studies now:
And Murder shortly I know, will be humanity Gent.
If we live here we must be knaves, believe it.
I cannot tell my Lord Dorialus, though my
Own nature hate it, if all determine to be knaves,
Isle try what I can doe upon my self, thats certain,
I will not have my throat cut for my goodness,
The virtue will not quit the pain.
But pray you tell me,
Why is the Prince, now ripe and full experient,
Not made a door in the State?
Because he is honest.
Goodness attend your Honours.
You must not be amongst vs then.
The Duchess, whose humble Servant I am proved to be, would speak with you.
Sir we are pleased to wait: when is it?
An hour hence my good Lords, and so I leave my service.
This is one of her Ferrets that she bolts bu∣sinesse out withal: this fellow, if hee were well ripped, has all the linings of a knave within him: how sly he looks?
Have we nothing about our clothes that he may catch at?
Of my conscience there's no treason in my doublet, if there bee, my elboes will discover it, they are out.
Faith, and all the harm that I can find in mine is, that they are not paid for, let him make what
he can of that, so he discharge that. Come, lets go.
And you shall find sir what a blessing heaven gave you in such a son.
Pray gods I may. Lets walk &amp; change out subject.
O sir, can any thing come sweeter to you, or strike a deeper joy into your heart then your sons virtue?
I allow his virtues: but tic not handsome thus to feed my self with such moderate praises of mine own.
The subject of our commendations is it self grown so infinite in goodness, that all the glory wee can lay upon it, though we should open volumes of his praises, is a mere modesty in his expression, and shows him lame still, like an ill wrought piece wan∣ting proportion.
Yet still he is a man, and subject still to more inordinate vices, then our love can give him blessing.
Else hee were a god: yet so near as he is, hee comes to heaven, that we may see so far as flesh can point vs things only worthy them, and only these in all his actions.
This is too much my Queen.
Had the gods loved me, that my unworthy womb had bred this brave man.
Still you run wrong.
A would have lived upon the comfort of him, fed on his growing hopes.
This touches me.
I know no friends, nor being, but his virtues.
You have laid out words enough vpō a subject.
But words cannot express him sir: why what a shape Heaven has conceived him in, oh Nature made him up!
I wonder Duchess.
So you must: for less then admiration loses this god-like man.
Have you done with him?
Done with? ô good gods what frailties this pass by vs without reverence!
I see no such perfection.
O dear Sir: you are a father, and those i oyes
To you speak in your heart, not in your tongue.
This leaves a taste behind it worse then physic.
Then for all his wisdom, valour,
Good Fortune, and all those Friends of honour,
They are in him as free and natural as passions
In a Woman.
You make me blush at all these years
To see how blindly you have flung your praises
Upon a Boy, a very child, and worthless,
Whilst I live of these Honours.
I would not have my love Sir: Make my tongue
Show me so much a woman: as to praise
Or dispraise, where my will is, without reason
Or general allowance of the people.
Allowance of the people, what allow they
Al, I have seed for truth, and they must doe it,
And dote upon him: love him, and admire him.
Howes that?
For in this youth and noble frowardness
All things are bound together that are kingly
A fitness to bear rule
No more
And sovereignty, not made to know command
I have sed no more.
I have done Sir though unwilling, and pardon me.
I doe, not a word more
I have gin thee poison
Of more infection then the Dragons tooth
Or the gross Ayre ore heated.
Timantus when saw you the prince?
I left him now Sir.
Tell me truly, out of your free opinion with∣out courting, How you like him:
How I like him?
Yes, for you in conversation may see more
then a Father.
It works.
Your grace has chosen out an ill observer.
Yes I mean of his Ill: you take rightly.
But you take me wrong: All I know by him
I dare deliver boldly: He is the store-house
And head of virtue: your great self excepted
That feeds the Kingdom.
These are flatteries: speak me his vices there you doe a service worth a Fathers thanks.
Sir, I cannot, If there bee any, sure they are the times which I could wish less dangerous. But pardon me, I am too bold.
You are not, forward and open what these dangers are.
Nay, good Sir.
Nay fall not off again,
I will have all.
Alas Sir, what am I, you should believe
My eyes or ears, so subtle to observe
Faults in a State, all my maine business
Is service to your Grace, and necessaries
For my poor life.
Doc not displease me Sirrah,
But that you know tell me, and presently.
Since your Grace will have it
Isle speak it freely: Always my obedience
And Love preserved unto the Prince.
Prithee to the matter.
For Sir if you consider
How like a Sun in all his great employments,
How full of heate.
Make me understand what I desire.
And then at his return
Doe not anger me.
Then thus Sir, All mislike ye,
As they would do the gods, if they did dwell with em.
What?
Talk and prate, as their ignoant rages
leads em, without Allegiance or Religion. For Heavens sake have a care of your own person, I cannot tell, their wickedness may lead Farther then I dare think yet.
O base people.
Yet the prince, for who this is pretended may
Perswadeem, &amp;c no doubt will, virtue is ever watchful
But be you still secured and comforted.
Heaven you have I offended, that this rod
So heavy and unnatural, should fall upon me
When I am old and helpless.
Brave Gentle: that such a matting love should sollow thee, to rob thee of a Father: All the Court is full of dangerous whispers.
I perceive it, and spite of all they, strengths will make my safety: Isle cut him shorter.
Isle cut him shorter first, then let him rule.
What a foul Age is this, when Virtue is
Made a sword to smite the virtuous? Alas, alas!
Isle teach him to fly lower.
By no means Sir, rather make more your love,
And hold your favour to him: for tic now
Impossible to yoke him, if his thoughts,
As I must ne'er believe, run with their rages,
Hee never was so innocent, but what reason
His grace has to with draw his love from me
And other good men that are neared your person
I cannot yet find out: I know my duty
Has ever been attending.
Tic too plain: He means to play the villain,
Isle prevent him, not a word more of this, be private.
Madame ti's done.
He cannot escape me. Have you spoken with the noble men?
Yes Madame they are here: I waite a fur∣there service.
Till yet be the prince, you need no more instructions.
No I have it.
That fool that willingly provokes a woman,
Has made him self another evil Angel,
And a new Hell, to which all other torments
Are but mere pastime: Now my Noble Lords
You must excuse me that unmannerly
Wee have broke your private business.
Your good grace may command vs, &amp; that.
Faith my Lord Agenor: Tic so good a cause
I am confident, you cannot loose by it.
Which way does she Fish now?
The Devil is but a Fool to a right woman.
Madame wee must needs win in doing
Service to such a gracious Lady.
I thank you, and will let you know the busi∣ness: So I may have your helps, never be doubtful,
For tic so just a cause, and will to you
Upon the knowledge, seem so honourable,
That I assure my self your willing harts
Will strait bee for me in it.
If she should prove good now, what were like?
Thunder in January, or a good woman,
Thats stranger then all Africa.
It shall not need your wonder, this it is;
The Duke you know is old, and rather subject
To ease and prayers now, then all those troubles,
Cares, and continual watchings, that attend
A Kingdoms safety, therefore to prevent
The fall of such a flourishing Estate
As this has ever been, and to put off
The murmur of the people that increase
Against my government, which the gods knows
I only feel the trouble of: I present
The prince unto your loves, a Gent.
In whom all Excellencies are knit together,
All pieces of a true man, let your prayers
Win from the Duke half his Vexation,
That he may undertake it, whose discretion
I must confess, though it be from the Father,
Yet now is stronger, and more apt to govern.
Tic not my own desire, but all the Lands
I know the weakness of it.
Madam, this noble care and love has won vs
For ever to your lives, weal to the King,
And since your Grace has put it in our mouths,
Weasel win him with the cunningest words we can.
I was never consent in a woman before,
For commonly they are like Apples: If once they bruise
They will grow rotten through, and serve for no∣thing but to assuage swellings.
Good Lords delay no time since tic your good
Pleasures to think my counsel good, &amp; by no means
Let the prince know it, whose affections
Will stir mainly against it; besides his Father,
May hold him dangerous, if it be not carried
So that his forward will apreare not in it,
Go, and be happy.
Well, I would not bee Chronikled as thou
Wilt be for a good woman, for all the world.
Madame, wee kiss your hands, and so inspire
Nothing but happiness can crown our prayers.
And thus she has used me, first not a good mother?
Why killed you her not?
The Gods forbid it.
S'light, if all the women ithe world were
Barren, she had died.
But tic not reason directs thee thus.
Then gave I none at all, for all I have in me
Directs me: Your Father's in a pretty Rage.
Why.
Nay, tic well, if hee know himself, but some of the Nobility have delivered a petition to him: whats int, I know not, but it has put him to his trumps: hee has taken a months time to answer it and chafes like himfelfe.
Hoe's here Ismenus.
Set me down Tellamon. Leucippus.
Sir.
Nay good sir bee at peace, I dare swear hee knew not of it.
You are foolish: peace.
All will go ill, deny it boldly sir, trust me he cannot prove it by you.
What!
You'll make all worse too with your facing it.
What is the matter!
Know thou that petition?
Look on it well: would thou be joined with me
(Unnatural child to be weary of me)
Ere Fate esteem me fit for other worlds.
May be he knows not of it.
O strange carriages!
Sir, As I have hope that there is any thing
To reward doing well, my usages
Which hane been (but tic no matter what)
Have put me so far from the thought of Greatness,
That I should welcome it like a disease
That grew upon me, and I could not cure.
They are my enemies that gave you this,
And yet they call me friend, and are themselves
I fear abused. I am weary of my life,
For Gods sake take it from me: it creates
More mischief in the State then it is worth.
The usage I have had, I know would make
Wisdom her self run frantic through the streets.
And Patience quarrel with her shadow.
Sir, this sword —
Alas: help for the love of heaven,
Make way through me first, for he is your father,
What, would he kill me?
No sir, no.
Thou always make the best ont: but I feare--
Why doe you use me thus? who first can think
That I would kill my father, that can yet
For bear to kill you? Here sir is my sword,
I dare not touch it, lest she say again
I would have kilt you: let me not have mercy
When I most need it, if I would not change
Place with my meanest servant. Let these faults
Be mended Madame: if you saw how ill
They did become you, you would part with them.
I told the Duke as much before.
What? what did you tell him?
That it was only an ambition,
Nursed in you by your youth, provoked you thus,
Which age would take away.
It was his doing then: come hither Love.
No indeed sir.
How am I made; that I can bear all this?
If any one had used a friend of mine ne'er this,
My hand had carried death about it.
Lead me hence Tellamon: come my dear
I shall find time for this.
Madame, you know I dare not speak before
The King; but you know well, if not I le tell it you,
You are the most wickedst, and most murderous
Strumpet that ever was called Woman.
My Lord, what I can do for him he shall com∣mand me.
I know thou art too kind; away I say.
Sir, I am sure we dream this cannot be.
O that we did my wickedness has brought
All this to pass, else I should bear my self.
Look, doe you see whose there? your ver∣tuous Mothers issue: kill her, yet take some little bid∣ling revenge.
Away, the whole Court calls her virtuous; for they say, she is unlike her mother and if so she can have no vice.
I le trust none of em that come of such a breed.
But I have found
A kind of love in her to me: alas,
Think of her death; I dare be sworn for her,
She is as free from any hate to me
As her bad mothers full. She was brought up
7th Country, as her tongue will let you know
If you but talk with her, with a poor Uncle,
Such as her mother had.
Shees come again.
I would fene speak to the good Marquess my brother, if I but thought he could abaid me.
Sister, how doe you.
Very well I thank you.
How does your good mother?
Fie, fie, Ismenus for shame, mock such an innocent soul as this.
Feth a she be no good, God may her so.
I know you wish it with your heart dear sister, but she is good I hope.
Are you so simple, to make so much of this,
Doe you not know,
That all her wicked mother labours for, is but to raise
Her to your right, and leave her this Duked ome.
I, but ne'er sir be afred;
For though she take th'vngainst weas she can,
Isle ne'er hat fro you.
I should hate my self Ismenus;
If I should think of her simplicity,
Ought but extremely well.
Nay as you will.
And though she be my Mother,
If she take any caurse to doe you wrong,
If I can feet, youst quickly hear ont sir:
And so Isle take my leave.
Farewell good Sister, I thank you.
You believe all this:
Yes;
A good faith doth well, but me thinks
It were no harde matter now, for her Mother to send
Her: yonder's one you may trust if you will too.
So I will, if he can show me as apparent signs
Of truth as she did; Does he weep Ismenus?
Yes, I think so: some goods happened I war∣rant; Doe you hear you? What honest man has escaped misery, that you are crying thus?
Noble Ismenus, wheres the Prince?
Why there; hast wept thine eyes out?
Sir, I beseech you hear me.
Well speak on.
Why will you hear him?
Yes Ismenus, why?
I would hear blasphemy as willingly.
You are to blame:
No Sir: Hee is not to blame;
If I were as I was.
Nor as thou art, y faith a whit to blame,
Whats your business?
Faith Sir, I am ashamed to speak before you,
My conscience tells me I have iniurd you,
And by the earnest instigation,
Of others have not done you to the King
All ways the best and friendliest offices,
Which pardon me, or I will never speak.
Never pardon him and silence a knave.
I pardon thee.
Your mother sure is nought
Why should thou think so?
O noble Sir, your honest eyes perceive not
The dangers you are led to shame upon her,
And what fell miseries the gods can think on
Show down upon her wicked head, she has plotted,
I know too well your death: would my poor life
Or thousand such as mine is might be offered
Like sacrifices up for your presuming,
What free oblations would she have to glut her,
But she is merciless, and bent to ruin,
If Heaven and good men steppe not to your reskue,
And timely, very timely, O this Duke dome!
I weep, I weep for the poor Orphans ith Country
Left with but Friends; or parents.
Now Ismenus, what think you of this fellow?
This was a lying knave, a flatterer,
Does not this love still show him so.
This love, this halter: if he prove not yet
The cunningest, ranckest Rogue that ever Canted,
Isle never see man again, I know him to bring,
And can interpret every new face he makes,
Look how he wrings like a good stool for a tear,
Take heed, Children and Fools
First feel the smart: Then weep.
A way, away, such an unkind distrust,
Is woes then a dissembling, if it be one,
And sooner leads to mischief I believe it,
And him an honest man: he could not carry
Under an evil cause so true a sorrow.
Take heed, this is your Mothers scorpion,
That carries stings even in his tears,
Whose soul is a rank poison through: Touch
Not at him, if you doe you are gone, if you had twenty
Lives: I knew him from a Roguish boy, when
Hee would poison Dogs, and keep tame Toads,
Hee lay with his Mother, and infected her, and now
She begs ith Hospital, with a patch of velvet,
Where her Nose stood: like the queen of spades.
And all her Teeth in her purse, the Devil and this
Fellow are so near, Tic not yet known which is the euiller Angel.
Nay then I see tic spite: Come hither friend. Hast thou not heard the cause yet that incēsd my mo∣there to my death, for I protest I feel none in my self?
Her will Sir, and ambition, as I think
Are the provokers of it as in women
Those two are ever powerful to destruction,
Beside a hate of your still growing virtues,
She being only wicked.
Heavens defend me as I am innocent,
And ever have bin from all immoderate thoughts and
Actions, that carry such rewards along with em.
Sir all I know, my duty must reveal
My country and my love command it from me,
For whom Isle lay my life down, this night coming.
A Counsel is appointed by the Duke,
To sit about your apprehension:
If you dare trust my faith: which by all good things
Shall ever watch about you: Go along,
And to a place Isle guide you: where no word,
Shall scope without your hearing, Nor, no plot.
Without discovering to you, which once known, you
have your answers and prevention.
You are not so mad to go; shift of this fellow, you shall bee ruled once by a wise man: rats bane get you gone, or —
Peace, peace for shame, thy love is too suspicious, tic away offered to preserve my life, and I will take it: be my Guide Timantus, and doe not mind this angry man, thou know him: I may live to requite thee.
Sir, this service is done for virtues sake, not for reward, how ever he may hold me.
The great pox on you: but thou hast that curse so much, twill grow a blessing in thee shortly. Sir, for wisdoms sake court not your death, I am your friend and subject, and I shall lose in both: if I loved you not, I would laugh at you, and see you run your neck into the noose, and cry a Woodcock.
So much of man, and so much fearful; fie, prithee have peace within thee: I shall live yet many a golden day to hold thee here dearest and nearest to me: Go on Timantus. I charge you by your love no more, no more.
Go, and let your own rod whip you:
I pity you, And dog, if he miscarry thou shalt pay fort,
Isle study for thy punishment, and it shall last
Longer and sharper then a tedious Winter,
Till thou blasphemst, and then thou die and dambst.
I wonder the Duchess comes not.
She has hard sir your will to speak with her:
But there is some thing leaden at her heart
(Pray God it be not mortal) that even keeps her
From conversation with her self.
O whither will ye me cross affections pull me?
Fortune, Fate, &amp; you whose powers direct our actions,
And dwell within vs: you that are Angels
Guiding to virtue, wherefore have you given
So strong a hand to cuill? wherefore suffered
A Temple of your own, you Deities
Where your fair selves dwelt only, &amp; your goodness
Thus to be soiled with sin?
Heaven bless vs all.
From whence coms this distemper? speak my fair one.
And have you none, love and obedience,
You ever faithful Servants to employ
In this strange story of impiety,
But me a Mother, Must I bee your strumpet?
To lay black treason upon and in him,
In whom all sweetness was: in whom my love
Was proud'de, to have a being, in whom Justice,
And all the gods for our imaginations
Can work into a man, were more then virtues,
Ambition down to Hell, where thou were fosterd
Thou hast poisoned the best soul, the purest, whitest,
And merest innocentst it self that ever
Men's greedy hopes gave life to.
This is still stranger: lay this treason,
Open to my correction.
O what a combat duty and affection
Breeds in my blood.
If thou concealst him may
Beside my death the curses of the Country,
Troubles of conscience, and a wretched end,
Bring thee unto a poor forgotten grave.
My being: for another tongue to tell it,
Cease, a mother! some good man that dares
Speak for his King and Country: I am full
Of too much women's pity: yet ô Heaven,
Since it concerns the safety of my sovereign
Let it not be a cruelty in me
Nor draw a Mothers name in question,
Amongst unborn people, to give up that man:
To law and Justice that vnrighteously
Has sought his sathers death: be dease, be dease Sir,
Your Son is the Offender, Now have you all,
Would I might never speak again.
My Son? Heaven help me.
No more I thought it: and since
His life is grown so dangerous: Let them that
Gave him, take him: Hee shall dye,
And with him all my fears.
O use your mercy: you have a brave subject
To bestow it on, Isle forgive him Sir: and for his
Wrong to me, Isle be before ye.
Durst his villainy extend to thee?
Nothing but heats of youth Sir.
Upon my life hee sought my Bed.
I must confess he loved me:
Somewhat beyond a Son, and still pursued it
With such a Lust: I will not say Ambition,
That clean sorgetting all obedience,
And only following his first heate unto me,
Hee hotly fought your death, and me in Marriage.
O Villain!
But I forget all: and am half ashamed
To press a man so far.
Where is the Duke? for Gods sake bring me to him.
Here I am; Each corner of the Dukedom
Sends new affrights forth: what would thou speak?
I cannot Sir, my fear ties up my tongue.
Why, whats the matter? Take thy courage
To thee; and boldly speak, where are the Guard?
In the Gods name, cut with it:
Treason, treason.
In whom?
Double the Guard.
There is a fellow Sir.
Leave shaking man.
It is not for fear, but wonder. Leon. Well.
There is a fellow Sir, close ith Lobby:
You other Guard, look to the door there.
But let me know the business.
O that the hearts of men should be so hardened
Against so good a Duke, for Gods sake Sir,
Seek means to save your self, This wretched slave
Has his sword in his hand, I know his heart:
Oh it hath almost killed me with the thought of it.
Where is hee?
The Lobby Sir, close in a corner:
Look to your selves, for Heavens sake,
Me thinks hee is here already.
Fellows of the Guard be valiant.
Go sirs, and apprehend him; Treason shall
Never dare me in mine own Gates.
Tic done.
And thou shalt find it to thy best content.
Are these the comforts of my Age?
Their happy that end their days Contented
With a little, and live aloof from dangers, to a King
Every content doth a new; peril bring.
O let me live no longer, shame of Nature,
Bastard to Honour: Traitor, Murderer,
Devil in a humane shape, A way with him,
Hee shall not breath his hot infection here.
Sir hear me.
Am I or hee your Duke? away with im
To a close prison: your Highness now shall know,
Such branches must be cropped before they grow,
What ever Fortune comes, I bid it welcome,
My innocence is my Armour: Gods preserve you.
Fare thee well. I shall never see so brave a Gētl:
Would I could weep out his offences.
Or I would weeepe out mine eyes.
Come Gentlemen, weal determine presently
About his death: wee cannot be too forward in our
Safety: I am very sick, lead me unto my Bed.
Sirrah, go fetch my Fox from the Cutlers: Theres money for the scouring: Tell him, I stop a Groat since the last great Muster: Hee had in store Pitch for the bruise. He took with the Recoiling of his Gun.
Yes Sir.
And doe you hear? when you come, Take down my Buckler, and sweep the Copwebs off: and Grind the pick out, and fetch a Nail or two: and Tack on bracers: your Mistress made a potlid ont, I thank her at her Maids wedding, and burnt off the Handle.
I will Sir.
Whose within here, hoe Neighbour, not stirring yet?
O God morrow, god morrow: what
News, what news?
It holds, he dyes this morning.
Then happy man be his fortune, I am resolude,
And so am I, and 40. more good fellows
That will not give their heads for the washing, I take it.
Sfoote man, who would not hang in such Good company, and such a cause? A Fire a Wife and Children, Tic such a Jest that men should look be∣hind em to the world: And let their honours, their honours Neighbour slip.
Isle give thee a pint of Bastard and a roll For that bare word,
They say that we Taylors, are things that
Lay one another, and our Geese hatche vs: Isle make some of um feel they are Goof ath game then,
Ifack take down my Bill, tic ten to one I use it, Take a
Good heart man, all the low ward is ours, with a wet
Finger.
And lay my Cut-fingred Gantlet ready for me,
That that I used to work in, when the Gentle: were
Up against vs, a beaten out of town, and almost out a
Debt to, for a plague on um, they never paid well since,
And take heed sirrah: your mistress hears not of this
Business, shees near her time: yet if she doe,
I care not, she may long for Rebellion,
For she has a devilish spirit,
Come, lets call up the new Ircmonger, is as
Tough as steel, &amp; has a fine wit in these resurrections:
Are you stirring Neighbour?
O Good morrow Neighbours,
Isle come to you presently.
Go too, this is his Mothers doing: shees a Polecat.
As any is in the world.
Then say I have hit it, and a vengeance on her, let her be what she will.
Amen say I, she has brought things to a fine pass with her wisdom, doe you mark it?
One thing I am sure she has, the good old Duke she gives him pap again they say, and dandles him, and hangs a corrall and bells about his neck, and makes him believe his teeth will come again; which if they did, and I he, I would worry her as never cur was worried: I would neighbour till my teeth met I know where, but thats counsel.
Good morrow neighbours: hear you the sad news?
Yes, would we knew as well how to prevent it.
I cannot tell, me thinks it were no great matter, if men were men: but —
You do not twit me with my calling neighbor?
No surely: for I know your spirit to be tall, pray be not vexed.
Pray forward with your counsel:
I am what I am, and they that prove me, shall find me to their cost: do you mark me neighbour, to their cost I say.
Nay look how soon you are angry.
They shall neighbours: yes, I say they shall.
I doe believe they shall.
I know they shall.
Whether you doe or no I care not two-pence,
I am no beast, I know mine own strength neighbours;
God bless the King, your companies is fair.
Nay neighbour now ye err, I must tell you so and ye were twenty neighbours,
You had best go peach, doe, peach.
Peach, I scorn the motion.
Doe, and see what follows: Isle spend an hun∣dred pound, and be two I care not, but Isle undo thee.
Peach, ô disgrace: peach in thy face, and doe the worst thou can: I am a true man, and a free-man peach!
Nay look, you will spoil all.
Peach!
Whilst you two brawl together, the Prince will lose his life.
Come, give me your hand, I love you well, are you for the action.
Yes: but peach provokes me, tic a cold fruit,
I feel it cold in my stomach still.
No more, Isle give you cake to digest it.
Shut up my shop, and bee ready at a call boys, and one of you run over my old tucke with a few ashes, tic grown odious with tosting cheese: and burn a little giniper in my murrin, the maid made it her chamber-pot, an hour hence Isle come again; and as you here from me, send me a clean shirt.
The Chandler by the wharf, and it be thy will.
Gossip good morrow.
O good morrow Gossip: good morrow all, I see wee of one mind you cleave so close together: come tic time, I have prepared a hundred if they stand.
Tic well done: shall we sever, and about it?
First lets to the Tavern, and a pynt a piece will make vs Dragons.
I will have no mercy, come what will of it.
If my tucke hold Isle spit the Guard like Larks with sage between em.
I have a foolish bil to reckon with em, will make some of their hearts ache, and Isle lay it on: now shall I fight, twill doe you good to see me.
Come Isle do something for the Town to talk of when I am rotten: pray God there bee enough to kill, thats all.
How black the day begins!
Can you blame it, and look upon such a deed as shall be done this morning?
Does the Prince suffer to day?
Within this hour they say.
Well, they that are most wicked are most safe: twill be a strange Justice and a lamentable, gods keep vs from the too soon feeling of it.
I care not if my throat were next: for to live still, and live here, were but to grow fat for the Shambles.
Yet we must doe it, and thank em too, that our lives may be accepted.
Faith Isle go starve my self, or grow diseased to shame the hangman; for I am sure hee shall be my Herald, and quarter me.
I a plague on him, hoe's too excellent at annes.
Will you go see this sad sight my Lord Agenor?
Isle make a mourner.
If I could doe him any good I would go, The bare sight else will but afflict my spirit, my prayers shall be as near him as your eyes: As you find him settled, remember my love and ser∣vice to his Grace.
We will weep for joy sir, farewell.
Farewell to all our happiness, a long farewell.
Thou angry power, whether of heaven or hell,
That layst this sharpe correction on our Kingdom
For our offences, infinite and mighty,
O hear me, and at length be pleased, be pleased
With pity to draw back thy vengeance,
Too heavy for our weakness; and accept,
(Since it is your discretion, heavenly Wisdoms,
To have it so) this sacrifice for all,
That now is flying to your happiness,
Only for you most fit: let all our sins suffer in him.
Gods, whats the matter! I hope tic joy.
How now my Lords?
Isle tell you with that little breath I have;
More joy then you dare think, The Prince is safe from
Danger.
How!
Tic true, and thus it was; His hour was come
To lose his life, he ready for the stroke,
Nobly, and full of Saint-like patience,
Went with his Guard: which when the people saw,
Compassion first went out, mingled with tears,
That bred desires, and whispers to each other,
To doe some worthy kindness for the Prince.
And ere they understood well how to doe,
Fury stepped in, and taught them what to doe,
Thrusting on every hand to rescue him,
As a white innocent: then flew the roar
Through all the streets, of Save him, save him, save him;
And as they cried, they did for catching up
Such sudden weapons as their madness show them.
In short, they beat the Guard, &amp; took him from em,
And now march with him like a royal Army.
Heaven, heaven I thank thee,
What a slave was I to have my hand so far from
This brave rescue, 'tad been a thing to brag on
When I was old. Shall we run for a wager to the
Next Temple and give thanks?
As fast as wishes.
Good friends go home again, there's not a man shall go with me.
Will you not take revenge? I le call them on.
All that love me depart:
I thank you, and will serve you for your loves:
But I will thank you more to suffer me
To govern em once: more, I doe beg ye,
For my sake to your houses.
Gods preserve you.
And what house will you go too?
Ismenus I will take the wariest courses that I can think of to defend my self, but not offend.
You may kill your mother, and never offend your father an honest man.
Thou know I can scope now, thats all I look for: Isle leave.
Time. a pox take him, would I had him here, I would kill him at his own weapon single sides wee
have built enough on him: plague ont, Ime out of all patience: discharge such an Army as this, that would have followed you without paying, ô gods!
To what end should keep em? I am free.
Yes, free of the Traitors, for you are proclay∣med one.
Should I therefore make my selse one?
This is one of your moral Philosophy is it?
Heaven bless me from subtilties to undo my self with;
But I know if, reason her self were here,
She would not part with her own safety.
Well, pardon Ismenus, for I know
My courses are most just; nor will I stain em
With one bad action: for thy self, thou know,
That though I may command thee, I shall be
A ready servant to thee if thou need: and so Isle
Take my leave.
of whom?
Of thee.
Heart, you shall take no leave of me.
Shall I not?
No by the gods shall you not: nay if you have no more wit but to go obsolutely alone, Isle bee in a little.
Nay prithee good Ismenus part with me.
I wonnoty faith, never move it any more; for by this good light I wonnot.
This is an ill time to be thus unruly:
Ismenus you must leave me.
Yes if you can beat me away: else, the gods resuse me if I will leave you till I see more reason; you sha'nt undo your self.
But why wilt not leave me?
Why Isle tell you, Because when you are gone, then — life, if I have not forgot my reason— heel take me: you put me out of patience so: O!
marry when you are gone, then will your Mother: a pox confound her, she never comes in my head but she spoils my memory to: there are a hūdred reasons.
But show me one.
Show you, what a stir here is, why I will show you: Doe you think; well, well, I know what I know, I pray come, come. Tic in vain: but I am sure. Devils take em, what doe I meddle with em? You know your self. Soul, I think I am: is there any man ith world? as if you knew not this already better then I. Pish, pish, I le give no reason.
But I will tell thee one why thou should stay:
I have not one friend in the Court but thou,
On whom I may be bold to trust to send me
Any intelligence: and if thou love me
Thou wilt doe this, thou need not fear to stay,
For there are new-come Proclamations out;
Where all are pardoned but my self.
Tic true, and in the same Proclamation your fine sister Vrania, whom you used so kindly, is pre∣claimed heir apparent to the Crown.
What though, thou may stay at home with∣out danger.
Danger, hang danger, what tell you me of danger?
Why if thou wilt not do it, I think thou dare not.
I dare not: if you speak it in earnest, you are a boy.
Well fir, if you dare, let me see you do it.
Why so you shall, I will stay.
Why God a mercy.
You know I love you but too well.
Now take these few directions: farewell, send to me by the wariest ways thou can: I have a soul tells me we shall meet often. The gods protect thee.
Pox o'me self for an Ass, I me crying now, God be with you, if I never see you again: why then pray get you gone, for grief and anger wonnot let me know what I say. Isle to the Court as fast as I can, and see the new heir apparent.
What hast thou sound him?
Madame he is coming in.
Gods bless my brother where so ere he is:
And I be seech you keep me fro the bed
Of any naughty Tyrant whom my mother
Would ha me have to wrong him.
What would her new Grace have with me?
Leave vs a while. My Lord Ismenus,
I pray for the love of heaven and God,
That you would tell me one thing, which I know
You can doe weal.
Wheres her fine Grace?
You know me weel enough, but that you mock,
I am she my sen.
God bless him that shall bee thy husband, if thou worst breeches thus soon, thoult bee as im∣pudent as thy mother.
But will you tell me this one thing?
What first? if it be no great matter whether I doe or no, perhaps I will.
Yes faith tic matter.
And what first?
I pray you let we know whaire the Prince my brother is.
I faith you shan be hanged first, is your mother so foolish to think yonr good Grace can sift it out of me?
If you have any mercy left i'you to a poor wench tell me.
Why would not thou have thy brains beat out for this, to follow thy mothers steps so young?
But believe me, she knows none of this.
Believe you? why do you think I never had wits? or that I am run out of them? how should it belong to you to know, If I could tell?
Why I will tell you: and if I speak false
Let the Devil ha me, Yonders a bad man,
Come from a Tayrant to my mother, and what name
They ha for him, good faith I cannot tell.
An Ambassador.
Thats it: but he would carry me away,
And have me marry his Master; and Isle day
Ere I will ha him.
But whats this to knowing where the Prince is?
Yes, for you know all my mother does:
Again the Prince is but to ma me great.
Pray, I know that too well, what ten?
Why I would go to the good Marquess my
Brother, and put my self into his hands, that so
He may preserve himself.
O that thou had no seed of thy Mother in thee, and could mean this now.
Why feth I do, would I might ne'er stir more if I doe not.
I shall prove a ridiculous fool, Isle be damned else: hang me if I doe not half believe thee.
By my troth you may.
By my troth I doe: I know Ime an Ass fort,
But I cannot help it.
And won you tell me then?
Yes faith will I, or any thing else ith world, for
I think thou art as good a creature as ever was borne.
But ail go i'this ladst reparrell:
But you mun help me to Silver.
Help thee: why the Pox take him that will not help thee to any thing ith world; Isle help thee to Money, and Isle do it presently to, and yet soul, If you should play the scurvy Harlotry little pocky baggage now and cousin me, what then?
Why, an I do, would I might ne'er see day again.
Nay by this light I do not think thou wilt:
Isle presently provide thee money and a letter.
I but Isle ne'er deliver it.
When I have found my Brother, I will beg
To serve him; but he shall never know who I am;
For he must hate me then for my bad mother:
Isle say I am a country Lad that want a service,
And have streid on him by chance, lest he discover me;
I know I must not live long, but that taime
I ha to spend, shall be in serving him.
And though my Mother seek to take his life away,
In ai day my brother shall be taught that I was
Ever good, though she were nought.
Run away, the devil be her guide.
Faith shees gone: theres a Letter I found it in her pocket, would I were with her, shees a handsome Lady, a plague upon my bashfulness, I had bobbed her longagoe else.
What a base Whore is this, that after all
My ways for her advancement, should so poorly make virtue her undoer, and choose this time,
The King being deadly sick: and I intending
A present marriage with some foreign Prince,
To strengthen and secure my self. She writes here
Like a wise Gentle woman; She will not stay:
And the example of her dear brother, makes her
Fear her self, to whom she means to fly.
Why, who can help it?
Now poverty and Lechery which is thy end, rot thee, where ere to goosed with all thy goodness.
Byr'lady theyle bruise her: and she wear a brass. I am sure theyle break stone walls: I hane had experience of them both, and they have made me desperate: but theres a Messenger Madam come from the Prince with a Letter to Ismenus, who by him re∣turns an answer.
This comes as pat as wishes: thou shalt pre∣sently away Timantus.
Whither Madame?
To the Prince, and take the Messenger for guide.
What shall I doe there? I have done too much mischief to be believed again, or indeed, to scope with my head on my back if I be once known.
Thou art a weak shallow fool: get thee a disguise, and withal, when thou come before him, have a Letter faind to deliver him; and then, as thou hast ever hope of goodness by me, or after me, strike one home stroke that shall not need another: dare thou speak, dare thou? if thou fal'st off, go bee a Rogue a again, and lye and Pander to procure thy meat: dare thou speak to me.
Sure I shall never walk when I am dead. I have no spirit Madame, Isle bee drunk but Isle doe it, thats all my refuge.
Away, no more, then Isle raise an Army whilst the King yet lives, if all the means and power I have can doe it I cannot tell.
Are you inventing still? weal ease your studies.
Why how now saucy Lords?
Nay Isle shake ye, yes devil, I will shake ye.
Doe not you know me Lords?
Yes deadly sin we know ye, would we did not.
Doe you hear Whore, a plague a God upon thee, the Duke is dead.
Dead!
I, wild-fire and brimstone take thee: good man hee is dead, and past those miseries which thou, salt infection-like, like a disease, flungst upon his head. Doft thou hear, and it were not more respect in Wo∣man-hood in general then thee, because I had a Mo∣there, who I will not say she was good, she lived so near thy time, I would have thee in vengeance of this man, whose peace is made in heaven by this time, tide to a post, and dryde ith sun, and after carried about and shone at fairs for money, with a long sto∣rye of the devil thy father that taught thee to be who∣rich, envious, bloody.
Ha, ha, ha.
You flooring harlot, Isle have a horse to leap thee, and thy base issue shall carry Sumpters. Come Lords, bring her along, weal to the Prince all, where her hell-hood shall waite his censure; and if he spare thee she Goat, may he lye with thee again; and be∣side, may thou upon him some nestle soul dis∣ease that hate still follows, and his end, a dry ditch. Lead you corrupted whore, or Isle draw god shall make you skip: away to the Prince.
Ha, ha, ha, I hope yet I shall come too late to find him.
Alas poor boy, why dost thou follow me?
What can thou hope for? I am poor as thou art.
In good feth I shall be weell and rich enough
If you will love me, and not put me from you.
Why dost thou choose out me boy to undo thee?
Alas, for pity take another Master,
That may be able to deserve thy love
In breeding thee hereafter: me thou know not
More then my misery: and therefore can not
Look for rewards at my hands: would I were able,
My pretty knave, to doe thee any kindness: truly
Good boy, I would upon my faith thy harmelesle
Innocence moos me at heart, wilt thou go
Save thy self, why doest thou weep? Alas I doe not chide thee.
I cannot tell if I go from you, Sir I shall ne'er dawn day more: Pray if you can I will bee true To you: Let me waite on you: If I were a man, I would fight for you: Sure you have some ill-willers, I would slay um.
Such harmless souls are ever Prophets, well I take thy wish, thou shalt be with me still: But pri∣thee eat, then my good Boy: Thou wilt die my child If thou fasts one day more. This four days thou hast tasted nothing: Go into the Cave and eat: Thou shalt find something for thee, to bring thy blood a∣gen, and thy fair colour.
I can not eat God thank you,
But Isle eat to morrow.
Thow't bee dead by that time.
I should be well then, for you will not love me.
Indeed I will. This is the prettiest passion that ere I felt yet: why dost you look so earnestly upon me?
You have fair eyes Master.
Sure the Boy dotes: why dost thou sigh my child?
To think that such a fine man should live, and no gay Lady love him.
Thou wilt love me?
Yes sure till I dye, and when I am in heaven Isle even wish for you.
And Isle come to thee Boy. This is a love I never yet heard tell of: come, thou art sleepy child, go in; and Isle sit with thee: heaven what portends this?
You are sad, but I am not sleepy, would I could doe ought to make you merry: shall I sing?
If thou wilt good Boy.
Alas my boy, that thou should comfort me, and art far worse then I:
Law Master, theres one, look to your sen.
What art thou, that in this dismal place,
Which nothing could find out but misery,
Thus boldly stepped? Comfort was never here,
Here is nor food, nor beds, nor any house
Built by a better Architect then beasts;
And ere you get dwelling from one of them,
You must fight for it: if you conquer him,
He is your meat; if not, you must be his.
I come to you (for if I not mistake, you are the Prince) from that most Noble Lord Ismenus with a Letter.
Alas, I fear I shall be discovered now.
Now I feel my self the poorest of all mortal things.
Where is he that reciues such courtesies,
But he has means to show his gratefulness
Some way or other? I have none at all:
I know not how to speak so much as well
Of thee but to these trees.
His Letters speak him sir —
Gods keep me but fro knowing him till I dye: aye me, sure I cannot live a day, ô thou foul Traitor: How doe you Master?
How dost thou my child? alas, look on his, it may make thee repentant, to behold those innocent drops that thou hast drawn from thence.
Tic nothing sir and you be well.
O pardon me, know you me now sir?
How could thou find me out?
We intercepted a Letter from Ismenus, and
the bearer directed me.
Stand up Timantus boldly,
The world conceives that thou art guilty
Of divers treasons to the State and me:
But ô far be it from the innocence
Of a just man to give a traitor death
Without a trial: here thy Country is not
To purge thee or condemn thee; therefore
A nobler trial then thou dost deserve,
Rather then none at all, here I accuse thee
Before the face of heaven, to be a traitor
Both to the Duke my father and to me, and the
Whole Land: speak, is it so or no?
Tic true sir, pardon me.
Take heed Timantus how thou dost cast away thy self, I must proceed to execution hastily if thou confess it: speak once again, first so or no?
I am not guilty sir.
Gods and thy sword acquit thee, here it is.
I will not use any violence against your Highness.
At thy peril then, for this must be thy trial: and from hence forth look to thy self.
I doe beseech you sir let me not fight.
Up, up again Timantus,
There is no way but this believe me.
Now if — Fie, fie Timantus, is there no
Usage can recover thee from baseness? were thou
Longer to converse with men, I would have chidde
Thee for this: be all thy faults for given.
O spare me sir, I am not fit for death.
I think thou art not; yet trust me, fitter then
for life: Yet tell me ere my breath be gone, know of any other plots against me?
Of none.
What course would thou have taken when thou had kilt me?
I would hane tan your Page, and married her.
What Page?
Your boy there. — Dyes.
Is he fallen mad in death, what does he mean?
Some good God help me at the worst: how dost thou?
Let not thy misery vex me, thou shalt have
What thy poor heart can wish: I am a Prince.
And I will keep thee in the gayest clothes,
And the finest things, that ever pretty boy had given him.
I know you well enough,
Feth I am dying, and now you know all too.
But stir up thy self; look what a Jewel here is,
See how it glisters: what a pretty show
Will this make in thy little ear? ha, speak,
Eat but a bit, and take it.
Doe you not know me?
I prithee mind thy health: why thats well said my good boy, smile still.
I shall smile till death an I see you.
I am Vrania your sister-in-law.
How!
I am Vrania.
Dullness did cease me, now I know thee well;
Alas why came thou hither?
Feth for love, I would not let you know till I was dying; for you could not love me, my Mother was so nought.
I will love thee, or any thing: what? wilt
Thou leave me as soon as I know thee?
Speak one word to me: alas shees past it,
She will ne'er speak more.
What noise is that? it is no matter who
Comes on me now. What worse then mad are you
That seek out sorrows? if you love delights
Be gone from hence.
Sir, for you we come, as Soldiers to revenge the wrongs you have suffered under this naughty Creature: what shall bee done with her? say, I am ready.
Leave her to heaven brave Cousin, they shall tell her how she has sind against em, my hand shall no∣for be stained with such base blood: live wicked Mo∣there, that reverent title bee your pardon, for I will use no extremity against you, but leave you to heaven.
Hell take you all, if there be a place
Of torment that exceeds that, get you thither:
And till the devils have you, may your lives
Be one continued plague, and such a one,
That knows no friends nor ending.
May all ages that shall succeed curse you as I doe:
And if it be possible, I ask it heaven,
That your base issues may be ever Monsters,
That must for shame of nature and succession,
Be drowned like dogs
Would I had breath to please you.
Would you had love within you, and such
Grief as might become a Mother: look you there,
Know you that face, that was Vrania:
These are the fruits of those unhappy Mothers,
That labour with such horrid byrths as you doe:
If you can weep, theres cause; poor innocent,
Your wickedness has kilt her: Isle weep for you.
Monstrous woman,
Mars would weep at this, and yet she cannot.
Here lies your Minion too, slain by my hand,
I will not say you are the cause: yet certain,
I know you were too blame, the Gods forgive you.
See, she stands as if she were inventing
Some new destruction for the world.
Ismenus, thou art welcome yet to my sad com∣panie.
I come to make you somewhat sadder sir.
You cannot, I am at the height already.
Your Fathers dead.
I thought so, heaven be with him: ô woman, woman, weep now or never, thou hast made more sorrows then we have eyes to utter.
Now let heaven fall, I am at the worst of evils, a thing so miserable wretched, that every thing, the last of humane comforts hath left me: I will not bee so base and cold, to live and wait the mercies of these men I hate: no, tic just I dye, since Fortune hath left me my step descent attends me: hand, strike thou home, I have soul enough to guide; and let all know, as I stood a Queen, the same Isle fall, and one with me.
Ho.
How doe you sir?
Nearer my health, then I think any here, my tongue begins to falter: what is man? or who would be one, when he sees a poor weak woman can in an instant make him none.
She is dead already.
Let her be damned already as she is: post all for Surgeants.
Let not a man stir, for I am but dead:
I have some few words which I wold have you heart,
And am afraid I shall want breath to speak em:
First to you my Lords, You know Ismenus is
Undoubtedly heir of Licia, I doe beseech you all,
When I am dead to show your duties to him.
We vow to do it.
I thank you.
Next to you Cousin Ismenus, that shall be the Duke,
I pray you let the broken Image of Cupped
Be reedified, I know all this is done by him.
It shall be so.
Last, I beseech you that my Mother-in-Law may have a burial acording to — Dyes.
To what sir?
There is a full point.
I will interpret for him; she shall have burial according to her own deserts, with dogs.
I would your Majesty would haste for settling of the people.
I am ready.
Agenor, go and let the Trumpets sound
Some mournful thing, whilst we convey the body
Of this unhappy Prince unto the Court,
And of that virtuous Virgin to a grave:
But drag her to a ditch, where let her lye
Accursed, whilst one man has a memory.
The time now of my Revenge draws near;
Nor shall it lessen, as I am a god,
With all the cries and prayers that have been;
And those that be to come, tho they be infinite,
In need and number.

