ALvarez pardoned?
And returned.
I saw him land
At St. Lucars, and such a general welcome
Fame, as harbinger to his brave actions,
Had with the easy people, prepared for him,
At if by his command alone, and fortune
Holland with those low Provinces, that hold out
Against the Arch-Duke, were again compelled
With their obedience to give up their lives
To be at his devotion.
You amaze me,
For though I have heard, that when he fled from Civil
To save his life (then forfei%ed to Law
For murdering Don Pedro my deer Uncle)
His extreme wants enforced him to take pay
In th'Army sat down then before Ostena,
It was never yet reported, by whose favour
He durst presunt to entertain a thought
Of coming home with pardon.
It is our nature
Or not to hear, or not to give belief
To what we wish far from our enemies.
Sir it is most certain the Infantas letters
Assisted by the Arch-Dukes, to King Philip
Have not alone secured him from the rigour
Of our Castillian Justice, but returned him
A free man, and in grace.
By what cursed means
Could such a fugitive arise unto
The knowledge of their highnesses? much more
(Though known) to stand but in the least degree
Of favour with them?
To give satisfaction
To your demand, though to praise him I hate,
Can yield me small contentment, I will tell you,
And truly, since should I detract his worth,
'T would argue want of merit in my self.
Briefly, to pass his tedious pilgrimage
For sixteen years, a banished guilty-man,
And to forget the storms, th'affrights, the horrors
His constancy, not fortune overcame,
I bring him, with his little son, grown man
(Though it was said here he took a daughter with him)
To Ostends bloody siege that stage of war
Wherein the flower of many Nations acted,
And the whole Christian world spectators were;
There by his son, or were he by adoption
Or nature his, a brave Scene was presented,
Which I make choice to speak of, since from that
The good success of Alvarez, had beginning,
So I love virtue in an enemy
That I desire in the relation of
This young mans glorious deed, you'd keep your self
A friend to truth, and it.
Such was my purpose;
The Town being oft assaulted, but in vain,
To dare the proved defendants to a sally,
Weary of ease, Don Inigo Peralta
Son to the General of our Castle forces
All armed, advanced within shot of their walls,
From whence the musketeers plaid thick upon him,
Yet he (brave youth) as careless of the danger,
As careful of his honour, drew his sword,
And waving it about his head, as if
He dared one spirited like himself, to trial
Of single valour, he made his retreat
With such a slow, and yet majestique pace,
As if he still called loud, dare none come on?
When suddenly from a postern of the town
Two gallant horse-men issued, and o're-took him,
The army looking on, yet not a man
That durst relieve the rash adventurer,
Which Lucio, son to Alvarez then seeing,
As in the vant-guard he sat bravely mounted,
Or were it pity of the youths misfortune,
Care to preserve the honour of his Country,
Or bold desire to get himself a name,
He made his brave horse, like a whirl wind bear him,
Among the Combatants: and in a moment
Dischar'd his Petronell, with such sure aim
That of the adverse party from his horse,
One tumbled dead, then wheeling round, and drawing
A falchion swift as lightning, he came on
Upon the other, and with one strong blow
In view of the amazed Town, and Camp
He struck him dead, and brought Peralta off
With double honour to himself.
It was brave:
But the success of this?
The Camp received him
With acclamations of joy and welcome,
And for addition to the fair reward
Being a massy chain of gold given to him
By young Peralta's Father, he was brought
To the Infantas presence kissed her hand,
And from that Lady, (greater in her goodness
Then her high birth) had this encouragement
Go on young man; yet not to feed thy valour
With hope of recompense to come, from me,
For present satisfaction of what's past,
Ask any thing that's fit for me to give,
And thee to take, and be assured of it.
Excellent princess.
And styled worthily
The heart blood, nay the soul of Soldiers.
But what was his request?
That the repeal
Of Alvarez, makes plain: he humbly begged
His Fathers pardon, and so movingly
Told the sad story of your uncles death
That the Infant wept, and instantly
Granting his suit, working the Arch-duke to it,
Their Letters were directed to the King,
With whom they so prevailed, that Alvarez
Was freely pardoned.
It is not in the King
To make that good.
Not in the King? what subject
Dares contradict his power?
In this I dare,
And will: and not call his prerogative
In question, nor presume to limit it.
I know he is the Master of his Laws,
And may forgive the forfeits made to them,
But not the injury done to my honour;
And since (forgetting my brave Uncles merits
And many services, under Duke D' Alva)
He suffes him to fall, wresting from Justice
The powerful sword, that would revenge his death,
I'll fill with this Astrea's empty hand,
And in my just wreak, make this arm the Kings,
My deadly hate to Alvarz, and his house,
Which as I grew in years, hath still increased,
As if it called on time to make me man,
Slept while it had no object for her fury
But a weak woman, and her talked of Daughter:
But now, since there are quarries, worth her sight
Both in the father, and his hopeful son,
I'll boldly cast her off, and gorge her full
With both their hearts: to further which your friendship,
And oaths will your assistance, let your deeds
Make answer to me; useless are all words
Till you have writ performance with your Swords.
Go fetch my work: this ruff was not well starched,
So tell the maid, 'thas too much blew in it,
And look you that the Partridge and the Pullen
Have clean meat, and fresh water, or my Mother
Is like to hear on it.
O good Sir Iaques help me: was there ever such an Hermaphrodite heard of? would any wench living, that should hear and see what I do, be wrought to be???lieve, that the best of a man lies under this Petticoat, and that a Codpiece were far fitter here, then a pind-Placket?
You had best talk filthy: do; I have a tongue
To tell my Mother, as well as ears to hear
Your ribaldry.
May you have ten women's tongues that way I am sure: why my young Mr. or Mistress, Madam, Don or what you will, what the devil have you to do with Pullen, or Partridge? or to sit pricking on a clout all day? you have a better needle, I know, and might make better work, if you had grace to use it.
Why, how dare you speak this before me, sirha?
Nay rather, why dare not you do what I speak? ??? though my Lady your mother, for fear of Vitelli and his faction, hath brought you up like her daughter, and he has kept you this 20 year, which is ever since you were born, a close prisoner within doors, yet since you are a man, and are as well provided as other men are, me thinks you should have the same motions of the flesh, as other Cavaliers of us are inclined unto.
Indeed you have cause to love those wanton motions,
They having hope you to an excellent whipping,
For doing something, I but put you in mind of it,
With the Indian maid, the governor sent my mother
From Mexico.
Why, I but taught her a Spanish trick in charity, and help the King to a subject that may live to take grave Maurice prisoner, and that was more good to the State, then a thousand such as you are ever like to do: and I will tell you, (in a fatherly care of the Infant I speak it) if he live (as bless the babe, in passion I remember him) to your years, shall he spend his time in pinning, paint???ing, purling, and perfuming as you do? no, he shall to the wars, use his Spanish Pike, though with the danger of the lash, as his father has done, and when he is pro???voked, as I am now, draw his Toledo desperately, as ???
You will not Kill me? oh.
I knew this would silence him: how he hids his eyes?
If he were a wench now, as he seems, what an advantage
Had I, drawing two Toledos, when one can do this?
But oh me, my Lady: I must put up: young Master
I did but jest. O custom, what hast thou made of him?
For bringing this, be still my friend; no more
A servant to me.
What's the matter?
Here,
Even here where I am happy to receive
Assurance of my Alvarez return,
I will kneel down: and may those holy thoughts
That now possess me wholly, make this place
a Temple to me, where I may give thanks
For this unhoped for blessing Heavens Kind hand
Hath poured upon me.
Let my duty Madam
Presume, if you have cause of joy, to entreat
I may share in it.
It is well, he has forgot how I frighted him yet.
Thou shalt: but first kneel with me Lucio,
No more Post bumina now, thou hast a Father,
A Father living to take off that name,
Which my too credulous fears, that he was dead,
Bestowed upon thee: thou shalt see him Lucio,
And make him young again, by seeing thee,
Who only had a being in my Womb
When he went from me, Lucio: O my joys,
So far transport me, that I must forget
The ornaments of Matrons, modesty,
And grave behaviour; but let all forgive me
If in th'expression of my souls best comfort
Though old, I do a while forget mine age,
And play the wanton in the entertinement
Of those delights I have so long despaired of.
Shall I then see my Father?
This hour Lucio;
Which reckon the beginning of thy life
I mean that life, in which thou shalt appear
To be such as I brought thee forth: a man,
This womanish disguise, in which I have
So long concealed thee, thou shalt now cast off,
And change those qualities thou did learn from me,
For masculine virtues, for which seek no tutor,
But let thy fathers actions be thy precepts;
And for thee Zancho, now expect reward
For thy true service.
Shall I? you hear fellow Stephano, learn to know me more respectively; how dost tnou think I shall be???come the Stewards chair ha? will not these slender honchos show well with a chain, and a gold night-Cap after supper when I take the accounts?
Haste, and take down those blacks, with which my chamber
Hath like the widow, her sad Mistress, mourned,
And hang up for it, the rich Persian arras,
Used on my wedding night: for this to me
Shall be a second marriage: send for Musique,
And will the cooks to use their best of cunning
To please the palate.
Will your Ladyship have a Potato-pie, tic a good stirring dish for an old Lady, after a long Lent.
Be gon I say: why sir, you can go faster?
I could Madam: but I am now to practise the Stewards pace, that's the reward I look for: every man must fashion his gate, according to his calling: you fellow Stephano, may walk faster, to overtake preferment: so, usher me.
Pray Madam, let the wascoat I last wrought
Be made up for my Father: I will have
A cap and boote-hose suitable to it.
Of that.
We'll think hereafter Lucio: our thoughts now
Must have no object, but thy Fathers welcome,
To which thy half???
With humble gladness Madam. 
Where lost we Syaevedra?
He was met
Entering the City by some Gentlemen
Kinsmen, as he said of his own, with whom
For complement sake (for so I think he termed it)
He was compelled to stay: though I much wonder
A man that knows to do, and has done well
In the head of his troop, when the bold foe charged home,
Can learn so suddenly to abuse his time
In apish entertainment: for my part
(By all the glorious rewards of war)
I had rather meet ten enemies in the field
All sworn to fetch my head, then be brought on
To change an hours discourse with one of these
Smooth City fools, or tissen Cavaliers,
Then only Gallons, as they wisely think,
To get a Jewel, or a wanton Kiss
From a Court-lip, though painted.
My Love Clara
(For Lucio is a name thou must forget
With Lucio bold behaviour) though thy breeding
In the camp may plead something in the excuse
Of thy rough manners, custom having changed,
Though not thy Sex, the softness of thy nature,
And fortune (then a cruel stepdame to thee)
Imposed upon thy tender sweetness, burdens
Of hunter, cold, wounds, want, such as would crack
The sinews of a man, not borne a Soldier:
Yet now she smiles, and like a natural mother
Looks gently on thee, Clara, entertain
Her proffered bounties with a willing bosom;
Thou shalt no more have need to use thy sword;
Thy beauty (which even Belgia hath not altered)
Shall be a stronger guard, to keep my Clara,
Then that has bin, (though never used but nobly)
And know thus much.
Sir, I know only that
It stands not with my duty to gainsay you,
In any thing: I must, and will put on
What fashion you think best: though I could wish
I were what I appear.
Endeavour rather. 
To be what you are, Clara, entering here
As you were borne, a woman.
Let choice Music
In the best voice that ere touched humane ear,
For joy hath tide my tongue up, speak your welcome.
My soul, (for thou give new life to my spirit)
Myriads of joys, though short in number of
Thy virtues, fall on thee; Oh my Eugenia,
Th'assurance, that I do embrace thee, makes
My twenty years of sorrow but a dream,
And by the Nectar, which I take from these,
I feel my age restored, and like old AEson
Grow young again.
My Lord, long wished for welcome,
Tic a sweet briefness, yet in that short word
All pleasures which I may call mine, begin,
And may they long increase, before they find
A second period: let mine eyes now surfeit
On this so wished for object, and my lips
Yet modestly pay back the parting kiss
You trusted with them, when you fled from Civil
With little Clara my sweet daughter: lives she?
Yet I could chide my self, having you here
For being so coveteous of all joys at once,
'Tenquire for her, you being alone, to me
My Clara, Lucio, my Lord, my self;
Nay more then all the world.
As you, to me are.
Sit down, and let me feed upon the story
Of your past dangers, now you are here in safety
It will give relish, and fresh appetite
To my delights, if such delights can cloy me.
Yet do not Alvarez, let me first yield you
Account of my life in your absence, and
Make you acquainted how I have preserved
The Jewel left locked up in my womb,
When you, in being forced to leave your country,
Suffered a civil death. 
Doe my Eugenia,
Tic that I most desire to he are,
Then know 
What voice is that?
If you are noble Enemies, 
Oppress me not with odds, but kill me fairly,
Stand off, I am too many of my self. 
Murder, murder murder, your friend my Lord,
Don Syavedra is set upon in the Streets, by your enemies
Vitelli, and his Faction: I am almost killed with looking on them.
Isle free him, or fall with him: draw thy sword
And follow me.
Fortune I give thee thanks
For this occasion once more to use it. 
Nay, hold not me Madam; if I doe any hurt, hang me.
Oh I am dead with fear! let's fly into
Your Closet, Mother.
No hour of my life
Secure of danger? heaven be merciful,
Or now at once dispatch me. 
Follow him
Leave me to keep these off.
Assault my friend
So near by house?
Nor in it will spare thee,
Though it were a Temple: &amp; Isle make it one,
I being the Priest, and thou the sacrifice,
Isle offer to my uncle.
Haste thou to him,
And say I sent thee:
It was put bravely by,
And that: and yet comes on, and boldly rare,
In the wars, where emulation and example
Join to increase the courage, and make less
The danger; valour, and true resolution
Never appeared so lovely: brave again:
Sure he is more then man, and if he fall;
The best of virtue, fortitude would dye with him:
And can I suffer it? forgive me duty,
So I love valour, as I will protect it
Against my Father, and redeem it, though
It is forfeited by one I hate.
Come on,
All is not lost yet: You shall buy me dearer
Before you have me: keep off.
Fear me not,
Thy worth has took me Prisoner, and my sword
For this time knows thee only for a friend,
And to all else I turn the point of it.
Defend your Fathers Enemy?
Art thou mad?
Are you men rather? shall that valour, which
Begot you lawful honour in the wars,
Prove now the parent of an infamous Bastard
So foul, yet so long lived, as murder will
Be to your shames? have each of you, alone
With your own dangers only, purchased glory
From multitudes of Enemies, not allowing
Those nearest to you, to have part in it,
And doe you now join, and lend mutual help
Against a single opposite? hath the mercy
Of the great King, but newly washed away
The blood, that with the forfeit of your life
Cleaved to your name, and family like an ulcer,
In this again to set a deeper dye
Upon your infamy? you'll say he is your foe,
And by his rashness called on his own ruin;
Remember yet, he was first wronged, and honour
Spurred him to what he did, and next the place
Where now he is, your house, which by the laws
Of hospitable duty should protect him;
Have you been twenty years a stranger to it,
To make your entrance now in blood? or think you
Your country-man, a true born Spaniard, will be
An offering fit, to please the genius of it?
No, in this i'll presume to teach my Father,
And this first Act of disobedience shall
Confirm I am most dutiful.
I am pleased
With what I dare not give allowance to;
Unnatural wretch, what wilt thou doe?
Set free
A noble Enemy: come not on, by ???
You pass to him, through me: the way is open:
Farewell: when next I meet you, doe not look for
A friend, but a vowed foe; I see you worthy,
And therefore now preserve you, for the honour
Of my sword only:
Were this man a friend,
How would he win me, that being my vowed foe
Deserves so well? I thank you for my life;
But how I shall deserve it, give me leave
Hereafter to confider. 
Quit thy fear,
All danger is blown over: I have Letters
To the Governor, in the Kings name, to secure us,
From such attempts hereafter: yet we need not
That have such strong guards of our own, dread others;
And to increase thy comfort, know, this young man
Whom with such servant earnestness you eye,
Is not what he appears, but such a one
As thou with joy wilt bless, thy daughter Clara.
A thousand blessings in that word.
The reason
Why I have bred her up thus, at more leisure
I will impart unto you: wonder not
At what you have seen her doe, it being the least
Of many great and valiant undertakings
She hath made good with honour.
Isle return
The joy I have in her, with one as great
To you my Alvarez: you, in a man
Have given to me a daughter: in a woman,
I give to you a Son: this was the pledge
You left here with me, whom I have brought up
Different from what he was, as you did Clara,
And with the like success; as she appears
Altered by custom, more then woman, he
Transformed by his soft life, is less then man.
Fortune, in this gives ample satisfaction
For all our sorrows past.
My dearest Sister.
Kind brother.
Now our mutual care must be
Employed to help wronged nature, to recover
Her right in either of them, lost by custom:
To you I give my Clara, and receive
My Lucio to my charge: and we'll contend
With loving industry, who soonest can
Turn this man woman or this woman, man. 
Boy: my Cloak, and Rapier; it fits not a Gentle???man of my rank, to walk the streets in Cuerpo.
Nay, you are a very rank Gent. Signior, I am very hungry, they tell me in Civil here, I look like an Eel, with a mans head: and your neighbour the Smith here hard by, would have borrowed me the other day, to have fished with me, because he had lost his angle-rod.
Oh happy thou Lazarillo (being the cause of o???there men's wits) as in thine own: live lean, and witty still: oppress not thy stomach too much: gross feeders, great sleepers: great sleepers, fat bodies; fat bodies, lean brains: No Lazarillo, I will make thee immortal, change thy humanity into deity, for I will teach thee to live upon nothing.
Faith Signior, I am immortal then already, or very near it, for I doe live upon little or nothing: be???like that's the reason the Poets are said to be immortal, for some of them live upon their wits, which is indeed as good as little or nothing: But good Master, let me be mortal still, and let's go to supper.
Be abstinent; show not the corruption of thy ge???narration: he that feeds, shall die, therefore he that feeds not, shall live.
I; but how long shall he live? ther's the question.
As long as he can without feeding: did thou read of the miraculous maid in Flanders?
No, nor of any maid else; for the miracle of virginity now adays ceases, ere the virgin can read virginity?
She that lived three year without any other su???stenance then the smell of a Rose.
I heard of her Signior; but they say her guts shrunk all into Lute-strings, and her neather-parts clung together like a Serpents Tail, so that though she continued a woman still above the girdle, beneath yet she was monster.
So are most women, believe it.
Nay all women Signior, that can live only up???on the smell of a Rose.
No part of the History is fabulous.
I think rather no part of the Fable is History???call: but for all this, sir, my rebellious stomach will not let me be immortal: I will be as immortal, as mortal hunger will suffer: put me to a certain stint sir, allow me but a red herring a day.
O'dedios: would thou be gluttonous in thy delicacies?
He that eats nothing but a red herring a day, shall near be broiled for the devils rasher: a Pilcher, Signior, a Surdiny, an Olive, that I may be a philoso???pher first, and immortal after.
Patience Lazarillo; let contemplation be thy food a while: I say unto thee, one Peaze was a Soldiers provant a whole day, at the destruction of Jerusalem. 
I; and it were any where, but at the destruction of a place i'll be hanged.
Signior Pachieco Alasto, my most ingenious Cobbler of Civil, the bonos noxios to your Signiory.
Signior Metaldi de forgio, my most famous Smith, and man of mettle, I return your courtesy ten fold, and do humble my Bonnet beneath the Shooe-soale of your congie: the like to you Signior Mendoza Pediculo de ver???mime, my most exquisite Hose-heeler.
Her's a greeting betwixt a Cobbler, a Smith, and a Botcher: they all belong to the foot, which makes them stand so much upon their Gentry.
Signior Lazarillo.
Ah Signior see: nay, we are all Signiors here in Spain, from the Jakes-farmer to the Grandee, or Adelantado: this botcher looks as if he w're dowgh-bak'd a little butter now, and I could eat him like an oaten-Cake: his fathers diet was new Cheese and Onions when he got him: what a scallion fac'd-rascall it is?
But why Signior Pachieco, do you stand so much on the priority, and antiquity of your quality (as you call it) in comparison of ours?
I; your reason for that.
Why thou Iron-pated Smith: and thou wollen-witted Hose healer: hear what I will speak indifferent???lie (and according to Ancient writers) of our three professions: and let the upright Lazarillo be both judge, and moderator.
Still am I the most immortally hungry, that may be.
Suppose thou wilt derive thy pedigree, like some of the old Heroes, (as Hercules, Aeeas, Achilles) lineally from the Gods, making Saturn thy great Grand-father, and Vulcan thy Father: Vulcan was a God.
He'll make Vulcan your God-father by and by.
Yet I say Saturn was a crabbed block-head, and Vulgan a limping horn-head, for ??enus his wife was a strumpet, and Mars begat all her Children; therefore however, thy original must of necessity spring from Bastardy: further, what can be a more deject spirit in man, then to lay his hands under every ones horses feet, to doe him service, as thou dost? For thee, I will be brief thou dost botch, and not mend, thou art a hider of enormities, viz. scabs, chilblains, and kibed heals: much proane thou art to Sects, and Heresies, disturbing state, and government; for how can thou be a sound member in the Common-wealth, that art so subject to stitches in the anckles? blush, and be silent then, Oh ye Mechanic, compare no more with the politic Cob???ler: For Cobblers (in old time) have prophesied, what may they doe now then, that have every day waxed bet???la, and better? have we not the length of every mans foot? are we not daily menders? yea, and what men???ders? not horse-menders.
Nor manners-menders.
But soule-menders: Oh divine Cobblers; doe we not like the wise man spin our own threads, (or our wives for us?) doe we not by our sowing the hide, reap the beef? are not we of the gentle craft, whilst both you are but crafts-men? You will say you fear neither Iron nor steel, and what you get is wrought out of the fire, I must answer you again, though all this is but forgery, You may likewise say, a mans a man, that has but a hose on his head: I must likewise answer, that man is a botcher, that has a heel'd-hose on his head: to conclude there can be no comparison with the Cobbler, who is all in all in the Common-wealth, has his politic eye and ends on every mans steps that walks, and whose course shall be lasting to the worlds end.
I give place: the wit of man is wonderful: thou hast hit the nail on the head, and I will give thee six pots for it though I near clinth shoe again. 
Who's this? Oh our Alguazier: as arrant a knave as
Ever wore out head under two offices: he is one side Alguazier.
The other side Sergeant.
That's both sides carrion I am sure.
This is he apprehends whores in the way of justice, and lodges 'em in his own house, in the way of profit: he with him, is the Grand-Don Vitelli, twixt whom and Fernando Alvarez the mortal hatred is: he is indeed my Dons Bawd, and do's at this present lodge a famous Courtesan of his, lately come from Madrill.
Let her want nothing Signior, she can ask:
What loss, or injury you may sustain
I will repair, and recompense your love:
Only that fellows coming I mislike,
And did fore-warn her of him: bear her this
With my best love, at night i'll visit her.
I rest your Lordships Servant.
Good even, Signiors:
Oh Alvarez, thou hast brought a Son with thee
Both brightness, and obscures our Nation,
Whose pure strong beams on us, shoot like the Suns
On baser fires: I would to heaven my blood
Had never stained thy bold unfortunate hand,
That with mine honour I might emulate
Not persecute such virtue: I will see him
Though with the hazard of my life: no rest
In my contentious spirits can I find
Till I have grateside him in like kind. 
I know you not: what are ye? hence ye base Besegnios.
Mary Catzo Signior Alguazier, do'ye not know us? why, we are your honest neighbours, the Cobbler, Smith, and Botcher, that have so often sate snoring cheek by jowl with your signiory in rug at midnight.
Nay, good Signior, be not angry: you must understand, a Cat and such an Officer see best in the dark.
By this hand, I could find in my heart to shoe his head.
Why then know you Signior; thou mon???grill begot at midnight, at the Goal gate, by a Beadle, on a Catch-poles wife, are not you he that was whipped out, of Toledo for perjury.
Next, condemned to the Galleys for pilfery, to the bulls pizell.
And after called to the Inquisition, for Apostasy.
Are not you he that rather then you durst go an industrious voyage being pressed to the Islands, skulked till the fleet was gone, and then earned your royal a day by squiring puncks, and puncklings up and down the City?
Are not you a Portuguese borne, descended of the Moors, and came hither into Civil with your Master, an errant Taylor, in your red Bonnet, and your Blew Jacket lousy: though now your block-head be covered with the Spanish Block, and your lashed Should???ders with a Velvet Pee?
Are not you he, that have been of thirty callings, yet ne'er a one lawful? that being a Chandler first, professed sincerity, and would sell no man Mustard to his beef on the Sabbath, and yet sold Hypocrisy all your life time?
Are not you he, that were since a Surgeon to the Stews, and undertook to cure what the Church it self could not, strumpets that rise to your Office by be???ing a great Dons Bawed?
That commit men nightly, offencelesse, for the gain of a great a Prisoner, which your Beadle seems to put up, when you share three pence?
Are not you he, that is a kisser of men, in drunkenness, and a berrayer in sobriety?
Diabolo: they'll rail me into the Galleys again.
Yes Signior, thou art even he we speak of all this while: thou moist by thy place now, lay us by the heals: it is true: but take heed, be wiser, pluck not ruin on thine own head: for never was there such an Anato???my, as we shall make thee then: be wise therefore, Oh thou Child of the night! be friends and shake hands, thou art a proper man, if thy beard were redder: remem???ber thy worshipful function, a Constable though thou turn day into night, and night into day, what of that? watch less, and pray more: gird thy bears skin (viz. thy Rug-gowne) to thy loyes, take thy staff in thy hand, and go forth at midnight: Let not thy mittens abate the talons of thy authority, but gripe theft and whoredom, wheresoever thou meet 'em: bear'em away like a tempest, and lodge 'em safely in thine own house:
Would you have whores and thieves lodged in such a house?
They ever doe so: I have found a thief, or a whore there, when the whole Suburbs could not fur???nish me.
But why doe they lodge there?
That they may be safe, and forth-coming: for in the morning usually the thief is sent to the Goal, and the whore prostrates her self to the Justice.
Admirable Pachieco.
Thou Cobbler of Christendom.
There is no railing with these rogues: I will close with'em, till I can cry quittance: why Signiors, and my honest neighbours, will you impute that as a neglect of my friends, which is an imperfection in me? I have been Sand-blinde from my infancy: to make you amends, you shall sup with me.
Shall we sup with'ye sir? Of my conscience, they have wronged the Gentleman extremely,
And after supper, I have a project to employ you in shall make you drink, &amp; eat merrily this month: I am a little knavish: why and doe not I know all you to be knaves?
I grant you, we are all knaves, and will be your knaves: But, oh, while you live, take heed of being a proud knave.
On then pass: I will bear out my staff, and my staff shall bear out me.
Oh Lazarillo, thou art going to supper. 
Pray be not angry.
I am angry, and I will be angry diablo': what should you doe in the Kitchen, cannot the Cooks lick their fingers without your overseeing? nor the maids make pottage, except your dogs-head be in the pot? Don Lucio, Don Quot-queane, Don Spinster, wear a Petticoat still, and put on your smock a' monday: I will have a badie of clouts made for it, like a great girl: nay, if you will needs be starching of Ruffs, and sowing of black-work, I will of a mild, and loving Tutor, become a Tyrant, Your Father has committed you to my charge, and I will make a man, or a mouse on you.
What would you have me doe? this scurvy sword
So gals my thigh: I would it were burnt: pish, look
This cloak will ne'er keep on: these boots too hide bound,
Make me walk stiff, as if my legs were frozen,
And my Spurs gingle, like a Morris-dancer:
Lord, how my head aches, with this roguish hat;
This masculine attire, i??? most uneasy,
I am bound up in it: I had rather walk
In folio, again, loose, like a woman.
In Foolio, had you not?
Thou mock to heaven, and nature, and thy Parents,
Thou tender Leg of Lamb; Oh, how he walks
As if he had be-pise'd himself, and floors!
Is this a gate for the young Cavalier,
Don Lucio, Son and heir to Alvarez?
Has it a corn? or do's it walk on conscience,
It treads so gingerly? Come on your ways,
Suppose me now your Fathers foe, Vitelli,
And spying you in the street, thus I advance,
I twist my Beard, and then I draw my sword.
Alas.
And thus accost thee: traitorous brat,
How dur'st thou thus confront me? impious twig
Of that old stock, dewed with my kinsmans gore,
Draw, for i'll quarter thee in pieces four.
Nay, Prithee Bobadilla, leave thy fooling,
Put up thy sword, I will not meddle with' ye;
I, justly me, I care not: I'll not draw,
Pray be a quiet man.
Do'ye hear: answer me, as you would doe Don Vitelli, or i'll be so bold as to lay the pommel of my sword over the hilts of your head, my name's Vitelli, and i'll have the wall.
Why then i'll have the kennel: what a coil you keep?
Signior, what happened twixt my Sire and your
Kinsman, was long before I saw the world,
No fault of mine, nor will I justify
My Fathers crimes: forget sir, and forgive,
It is Christianity: I pray put up your sword,
Isle give you any satisfaction
That may become a Gentleman; however
I hope you are bred to more humanity
Then to revenge my Fathers wrong on me
That crave your love, and peace: law you now Zancho
Would not this quiet him, were he ten Vitellies.
Oh craven-chicken of a Cock o'th'game: well, what remedy? did thy father see this, Of my conscience, he would cut of thy Masculine gender, crop thine ears, beat out thine eyes, and set thee in one of the Peare-trees for a scar-crow: As I am Vitelli, I am satisfied but as I am Bobadilla Spindola Zancho, Steward of the house, and thy fathers servant, I could find in my heart to lop of the hinder part of thy face, or to beat all thy teeth into thy mouth: Oh thou whay-blooded milk-sop, Isle waite upon thee no longer, thou shaltev'n waite upon me: come your ways fir, I shall take a little pains with ye else. 
Where art thou Brother Lucio? ran tan tan ta ran tan ran tan tan, ta ran tan tan tan. Oh, I shall no more see those golden days, these clothes will never fadge with me: a???Of this filthy vardingale, this hip hape: brother why are women's honchos only li???meted, confined, hooped in, as it were with these same scurvy vardingales?
Because women's honchos only are most sub???jest to display and fly out.
Bobadilla, rogue, ten Ducats, I hit the propose of thy Cod-peicu.
Hold, if you love my life, Sister: I am not Zan???cho Bobadilla, I am your brother Lucio: what a fright you have put me in?
Brother? and wherefore thus?
Why, Master Steward here, Signior Zancho, made me change: he do's nothing but misuse me, and call me Cowheard, and swears I shall waite upon him.
Well: I doe no more then I have authority for: would I were away though: for she's as much too man???nish, as he too womanish: I dare not meddle with her, yet I must set a good face on it (if I had it) I have like charge of you Madam, I am as well to mollify you, as to qualify him: what have you to doe with Armours, and Pistols, and Javelins, and swords, and such tools? remember Mistress; nature hath given you a sheath only, to signify women are to put up men's weapons, not to draw them: look you now, it this a fit trot for a Gentlewoman? You shall see the Court Ladies move like Goddesses, as if they trodayre; they will swim you their measures, like whiting-mops as if their feet were sins, and the hinges of their knees oyld: doe they love to ride great horses, as you doe? no, they love to ride great asses sooner: faith, I know not what to say to'ye both Custom hath turned nature topsie-turvy in you.
Nay but Master Steward.
You cannot trot so fast, but he ambles as slow???lie.
Signior Spindle, will you hear me,
He that shall come to bestride your virginity, had better be afoot o'er the Dragon.
Very well.
Did ever Spanish Lady pace so?
Hold these a little.
Isle not touch 'em, I.
First doe I break your Office o'er your pate,
You Dog-skin-fac'd-rogue, pilcher, you poor Iohn,
Which I will be at to Stock-fish.
Sister.
Madam.
You Cittern-head, who have you talked to, ha????
You nasty, stinking, and ill-counten???nc'd Cur.
By this hand, Isle bang your brother for this, when I get him a lone.
How? kick him Lucio, he shall kick you Bob,
Spite of the nose, that's flat: kick him, I say,
Or I will cut thy head off.
Softly you'd best.
Now, thou lean, dried, and ominous visaged knave,
Thou false and peremptory Steward, pray,
For I will hang thee up in thine own Chain.
Good Sister, doe not choke him.
Murder, murder. 
Well: I shall meet with 'ye: Lucio, who bought this?
It is a reasonable good one; but there hangs one
Spaines Champion ne'er used truer: with this Stuff
Old Alvarez has led up men so close,
They could almost spit in the Canons mouth,
Whilst I with that, and this, well mounted, scurr'd
A Horse-troope through, and through, like swift desire;
And seen poor rogues retire, all gore, and gashed
Like bleeding Shads.
'Blesse us, Sister Clara,
How desperately you talk: what do'ye call
This Gun a dag?
Isle give it thee: a French petronell:
You never saw my Barberry, the Infant
Bestowed upon me, as yet Lucio?
Walk down, and see it
What into the Stable?
Not I, the Jades will kick: the poor Groom there
Was almost spoiled the other day.
Fie on thee,
Thou wilt scarce be a man before thy mother.
When will you be a woman?
Would I were none.
But natures privy Seal assures me one.
Thou angerst me: can strong habitual custom
Work with such Magic on the mind, and manners
In spite of sex and nature? find out sirha,
Some skilful fighter.
Yes sir.
I will rectify,
And redeem eiders proper inclination,
Or bray 'em in a mortar, and new mold 'em. 
Believe your eyes sir; I tell you, we wash an Ethiop.
I strike it for ten Ducats.
How now Clara,
Your breeches on still? and your petticoat
Not yet off Lucio? art thou not guelt?
Or did the cold Muscovite beget thee,
That lay here Leaguer in the last great frost?
Art not thou Clara, turned a man indeed
Beneath the girdle? and a woman thou?
Isle have you searched by???, I strongly doubt;
We must have these things mended: come go in. 
With Lucio say you? there is for you.
And there is for thee.
I thank you: you have now bought a little advice
Of me; if you chance to have conference with that
Lady there, be very civil, or look to your head: she has
Ten nails, and you have but two eyes: If any foolish
Hot motions should chance to rise in the horizon
Under your equinoctial there, qualify it as well as
You can, for I fear the elevation of your pole will
Not agree with the Horoscope of her constitution:
She is Bell the Dragon I assure you. 
Are you the Lucio, sir, that saved Vitelli?
Not I indeed sir, I did never brable;
There walks that Lucio, metamorphosed. 
Do ye mock me?
No, he do's not: I am that
Supposed Lucio, that was but Clara,
That is, and daughter unto Alvarez.
Amazement daunts me; would my life were riddles,
So you were still my fair Expositor:
Protected by a Lady from my death.
Oh I shall wear an everlasting blush
Upon my cheek from this discovery:
On you the fairest Soldier, I ere saw;
Each of whose eyes, like a bright beamy shield
Conquers, without blows, the contentious.
Sir, guard your self, you are in your enemies house,
And may be injured.
Tic impossible:
Foe, nor oppressing odds dares prove Vitelli,
If Clara side him, and will call him friend;
I would the difference of our bloods were such
As might with any shift be wiped away:
Or would to Heaven your self were all your name;
That having lost blood by you, I might hope
To raise blood from you. But my black-wing'd fate
Hovers aversely over that fond hope:
And he, whose tongue thus gratifies the daughter,
And sister of his enemy, wears a Sword
To rip the father and the brother up.
Thus you, that saved this wretched life of mine,
Have savd it to the ruin of your friends.
That my affections should promiscuously
Dart love and hate at once, both worthily?
Pray let me kiss your hand.
You are treacherous,
And come to do me mischief.
Speak on still:
Your words are falser (fair) then my intents,
And each sweet accent far more treacherous; for
Though you speak ill of me, you speak so well,
I doe desire to hear you.
Pray be gone:
Or kill me, if you please.
Oh, neither can:
For to be pone, were to destroy my life;
And to kill you, were to destroy my soul:
I am in love, yet must not be in love:
Isle get away a pace: yet valiant Lady,
Such gratitude to honour I do owe,
And such obedience to your memory,
That if you will bestow something, that I
May wear about me, it shall bind all wrath,
My most inveterate wrath, from all attempts,
Till you and I meet next.
A favour fir?
Why I will give ye good council.
That already
You Have bestowed. a Ribbon, or a Glove.
Nay those are tokens for a waiting maid
To trim the Butler with.
Your feather.
Fie; the wenches give them to their Serving-men.
That little ring.
Twill hold you but by th'finger;
And I would have you faster.
Any thing
That I may wear, and but remember you.
This smile: my good opinion, or my self.
But that it seems you like not.
Yes, so well:
When any smiles, I will remember yours;
Your good opinion shall in weight poise me
Against a thousand ill: Lastly, your self,
My curious eye now figures in my heart,
Where I will wear you, till the Table break.
So, whitest Angels guard you.
Stay sir, I
Have fitly thought to give, what you as fitly
May not disdain to wear.
What's that?
This Sword.
I never heard a man speak till this hour.
His words are golden chains, and now I fear
The Lioness hath met a tamer here;
Fie, how his tongue chimes: what was I saying?
Oh: this favour I bequeath you, which I tie
In a love-knot, fast, ne'er to hurt my friends;
Yet be it fortunate against all your foes
(For I have neither friend, nor foe, but yours)
As ere it was to me: I have kepit it long,
And value it, next my Virginity:
But good, return it, for I now remember
I vowed, who purchased it, should have me too.
would that were possible: but alas it is not;
Yet this assure your self, most honoured Clara,
Isle not infringe an Article of breath
My vow hath offered to ye: nor from this part
Whilst it hath edge, or point, or I a heart. 
Oh leave me living: what new exercise
Is crept into my breast, that blauncheth clean
My former nature? I begin to find
I am a woman, and must learn to fight
A softer sweeter battle, then with Swords.
I am sick me thinks, but the disease I feel
Pleases, and punishes: I warrant love
Is very like this, that folks talk of so;
I skill not what it is, yet sure even here,
Even in my heart, I sensibly perceive
It glows, and rises like a glimmering flame,
But know not yet the essence on it nor name. 
He must not? nor he shall not, who shall let him?
You? politic Diego, with your face of wisdom;
Don-blirt, the ???on your aphorisms,
Your grave, and sage Ale physiognomy:
Do not I know thee for the Alquazier
Whose dunghill all the Parish Scavengers
Could never rid? thou Comedy to men,
Whose serious folly is a but for all
To shoot their wits at; whilst thou hast not wit,
Nor heart, to answer, or be angry.
Lady.
Peace, peace, you rotten rogue, supported by
A staff of rottener office: dare you check
Anise accesses, that I will allow?
Piorato is my friend, and visits me
In lawful sort to espouse me as his wife;
And who will cross, or shall our enter-viewes?
You know me sirha, for no Chambermaid,
That cast her belly, and her wastcote lately;
Thou think thy Constableship is much: not so,
I am ten offices to thee: I, thy house,
Thy house, and Office is maintained by me.
My house of office is maintained in the garden:
Go too, I know you, and I have contrived;
You're a delinquent, but I have contrived
A poison, though not in the third degree:
I can say, blacks your eye, though it be grey;
I have connivd at this. your friend, and you:
But what is got by this connivency?
I like his feather well: a proper man,
Of good discourse, fine conversation,
Valiant, and a great carrier of the business,
Sweet breasted, as the Nightingale, or Thrush:
Yet I must tell you; you forget your self,
My Lord Vitellies love, and maintenance
Deserves no other Jack in the box, but he:
What though he gathered first the golden fruit,
And blew your pigges-coat up into a blister,
When you did wait at Court upon his mother;
Has he not well provided for the barn?
Beside, what profit reap I by the other?
If you will have me serve your pleasure, Lady,
Your pleasure must accommodate my service;
As good be virtuous and poor, as not
Thrive by my knavery: all the world would be
Good, prospered goodness like to villainy.
I am the Kings vice-gerent by my place;
His right Lieutenant in mine owe precinct.
Thou art a right rascal in all men's precincts;
Yet now my pair of twins, of fool, and knave,
Look we are friends; there's Gold for thee, admit
Whom I will have, and keep it from my Don;
And I will make thee richer then thou art wise:
Thou shalt be my Bawd, and my Officer:
Thy children shall eat still my good night Owl,
And thy old wife sell Andirons to the Court,
Be countenanced by the Dons, and wear a hood,
Nay keep my garden-house; Isle call her mother,
Thee father, my good poisonous red-har'd Dill,
And Gold shall daily be thy Sacrifice,
Wrought from a fertile Island of mine own,
Which I will offer, like an Indian Queen.
And I will be thy devil, thou my flesh,
With which Isle catch the world.
Fill some Tobacco,
And bring it in: if Piorato come
Before my Don, admit him; if my Don
Before my Love, conduct him, my dear devil. 
I will my dear flesh: first come, first served. Well said.
O equal Heaven, how wisely thou dispose
Thy several gifts? one's born a great rich fool,
For the subordinate knave to work upon:
Another poor, with wits addition,
Which well or ill used, builds a living up;
And that too from the Sire oft discends:
Only fair virtue, by traduction
Never succeeds, and seldom meets success;
What have I then to do with 't? My free will
Left me by Heaven, makes me or good, or ill:
Now since vice gets more in this vicious world
Then piety, and my stars confluence
Enforce my disposition to affect
Gain, and the name of rich, let who will practice
War, and grow that Way great: religious,
And that way good: my chief felicity
Is wealth the nurse of sensuality:
And he that mainly labours to be rich,
Must scratch great scabs, and claw a Strumpets itch. 
To say sir, I will wait upon your Lord,
Were not to understand my self.
To say sir
You will doe any thing but wait upon him,
Were not to understand my Lord.
Isle meet him
Some half hour hence, and doubt not but to render
His son a man again: the cure is easy,
I have done divers.
Women do ye mean, sir?
Cures I do mean sir: be there but one spark
Of fire remaining in him unextinct,
With my discourse Isle blow it to a flame;
And with my practice, into action:
I have had one so full of childish fear,
And womanish hearted sent to my advice,
He durst not draw a Knife to cut his meat.
And how sir, did you help him?
Sir, I kept him
Seven days in a dark room by Candle-light,
A plenteous Table spread with all good meats,
Before his eyes, a case of keen broad Knives,
Upon the board, and he so watched, he might not
Touch the least modicum, unless he cut it:
And thus I brought him first to draw a knife.
Good.
Then for ten days did I diet him
Only with burnt Pork sir, and gammons of Bacon;
A pill of Caveary now and then,
Which breeds choler adust you know.
Tic true.
And to purge phlegmatic humour, and cold crudities;
In all that time, he drank me Aqua fortis,
And nothing else but???
Aqua vite Signior,
For Aqua fortis poisons.
Aqua fortis
I say again: what's one mans poison Signior,
Is another meat or drink.
Your patience sir;
By your good patience, h'ad a huge cold stomach.
I fired it: and gave him then three sweats
In the Artillery-yard three drilling days:
And now he'll shoot a Gun, and draw a Sword,
And fight with any man in Christendom.
A receipt for a coward: Isle be bold sir
To write your good prescription.
Sir, hereafter
You shall, and underneath it put probatum:
Is your chain right?
Tic both right and just sir;
For though I am a Steward, I did get it
With no mans wrong.
You are witty.
So, so.
Could you not cure one sir, of being too rash
And over-daring? there now's my disease:
Fool-hardy as they say, for that in sooth
I am.
Most easily.
How?
To make you drunk sir,
With small Beer once a day; and beat you twice,
Till you be bruised all over: if that help not,
Knock out your brains.
This is strong Physic Signior,
And never will agree with my weak body:
I find the medcine worse then the malady,
And therefore will remain fool-hardy still:
You'll come sir?
As I am a Gentleman.
A man of the Sword should never break his word.
Isle overtake you: I have only sir
A complemental visitation
To offer to a Mistress lodged here by.
A Gentlewoman?
Yes sir.
Fair, and comely?
Oh sir, the Paragon, the Non-parill
Of Civil, the most wealthy Mine of Spain,
For beauty, and perfection.
Say you so?
Might not a man entreat a courtesy,
To walk along with you Signior, to peruse
This dainty Mine, though not to dig in it Sgnior?
Hanh ??? I hope you'll not deny me, being a stranger;
Though I am Steward, I am flesh and blood,
And frail as other men.
Sir, blow your nose:
I dare not for the world: no, she is kept
By a great Don, Vitelli.
How?
Tic true.
See, things will veer about: this Don Vitelli
Am I to seek now, to deliver Letters
From my young Mistress Clara; and I tell you,
Under the Rose, because you are a stranger,
And my special friend, I doubt there is
A little foolish love betwixt the parties,
Unknown unto my Lord.
Happy discovery:
My fruit begins to ripen: hark you sir,
I would not wish you now, to give those Letters:
But home, and op this to Madonna Clara,
Which when I come Isle justify, and relate
More amply, and particularly.
I approve
Your counsel, and will practice it: bazilos manos:
Here's two chewres chewrd: when wisdom is employed
Tic ever thus: your more acquaintance, Signior:
I say not better, least you think, I thought not
Yours good enough. 
Your servant excellent Steward.
Would all the Dons in Spain had no more brains,
Here comes the Alguazier: dieu vous guard Monsieur.
Is my cousin stirring yet?
Your cousin (good cousin?)
A whore is like a fool, akin to all
The gallants in the Town: Your cos, good Signior,
Is gone abroad sir, with her other cousin,
My Lord Vitelli: since when there hath been
Some dozen cousins here to enquire for her.
he's greatly allied sir.
Marry is she sir,
Come of a lusty kindred: the truth is,
I must connive no more: no more admittance
Must I consent to; my good Lord has threatened me,
And you must pardon.
Out upon thee man,
Turn honest in thine age? one foot in the grave?
Thou shalt not wrong thy self so, for a million:
Look, thou three-headed Cerberus (for wit
I mean) here is one sop, and two, and three,
For every chop a hit.
I marry sir:
Well, the poor heart loves you but too well.
We have been talking on you faith this hour:
Where, what I said, go too: she loves your valour;
Oh and your Music most abominably:
She is within sir, and alone: what mean you?
That is your Sergeants side, I take it sir;
Now I endure your Constables much better;
There is less danger in it: for one you know
Is a tame harmless monster in the light,
The Sergeant salvage both by day, and night.
Isle call her to you for that.
No, I will charm her. 
She's come.
My Spirit.
Oh my Sweet,
Leap hearts to lips, and in our kisses meet.
Turn, turn thy beauteous face away, 
How pale and sickly looked the day,
In emulation of thy brighter beams?
Oh envious light, flv, fly, he gove,
Come night, and piece two breasts at one;
When what love does, we will repeat in dreams.
Yet (thy eyes open) who can day hence fright,
Let but their lids fall, and it will be night.
Well, I will leave you to your fortitude;
And you to temperance: ah, ye pretty pair,
It were sin to sunder you. Lovers being alone
Make one of two, and day and night all one.
But fall not out, I charge you, keep the peace;
You know my place else. 
No, you will not marry:
You are a Courtier, and can sing (my Love)
And want no Mistresses: but yet I care not,
Isle love you still; and when I am dead for you,
Then you'll believe my truth.
You kill me (fair)
It is my lesson that you speak: have I
In any circumstance deserved this doubt?
I am not like your false and perjured Don
That here maintains you, and has vowed his faith,
And yet attempts in way of marriage
A Lady not far off.
How's that?
Tic so:
And therefore Mistress, now the time is come
You may demand his promise; and I swear
To marry you with speed.
And with that Gold
Which Don Vitelli gives, you'll walk some voyage
And leave me to my trade; and laugh, and brag,
How you ore-reach'd a whore, and gulled a Lord.
You anger me extremely: fare you well.
What should I say to be believd? expose me
To any hazard; or like jealous Juno
(The incensed step-mother of Hercules)
Design me labours most impossible,
Isle doe 'em, or die in 'em; so at last
You will believe me.
Come, we are friends: I doe.
I am thine, walk in: my Lord has sent me outsides,
But thou shalt have 'em, the colours are too sad:
Faith Mistress, I want clothes indeed.
I have
Some Gold too, for my servant.
And I have
A better mettle for my Mistress. 
Undone???wit now or never help me: my Master
He will cut my throat, I am a dead Constable;
And he'll not be hanged neither, there's the grief:
The party sir is here.
What?
He was here;
I cry your Lordship mercy: but I rattled him;
I told him here was no companions
For such debauched, and poor-condition'd fellows;
Ibid him venture not so desperately
The cropping of his ears, slitting his nose,
Or being gilt.
It was well done.
Please your honour,
I told him there were Stews, and then at last
Swore three or four great oaths she was removed,
Which I did thihke I might in conscience,
Being for your Lordship.
What became of him?
Faith sir, he went away with a flea in's ear,
Like a poor cur, clapping his trindle tail
Betwixt his legs.???A chi ha, a chi ha, chi ha??? now luck.
Tic he, do as I told thee: 'Blesse thee Signior.
Oh, my dear Lord.
Malroda, what alone?
She never is alone, that is accompanied
With noble thoughts, my Lords and mine are such,
Being only of your Lordship.
Pretty Lass.
Oh my good Lord, my picture's done: but faith
It is not like; nay this way sir, the light
Strikes best upon it here.
Excellent wench. 
I am glad the danger's over. 
Tic wondrous like,
But that Art cannot counterfeit what Nature
Could make but once.
Ell's clear; another tune
You must hear from me now: Vitelli, you're
A most perfidious and a perjured man,
As ever did usurp Nobility.
What meanst thou Mal.?
Leave your betraying smiles,
And change the tunes of your enticing tongues
To penitential prayers; for I am great
In labour even with anger, big with child
Of women's rage, bigger then when my womb
Was pregnant by thee: go seducer, fly
Out of the world, let me the last wretch be
Dishonoured by thee: touch me not, I loath
My very heart, because thou layst there long;
A woman's well helped up, that's confident
In ere a glittering outside on you all:
Would I had honestly been matched to some
Poor Countrey-swaine, ere known the vanity
Of Court: peace then had been my portion,
Nor had been consent by an hours pomp
To be a whore unto my dying day.
Oh the uncomfortable ways such women have,
Their different speech and meaning, no assurance
In what they say or do: Dissemblers
Even in their prayers, as if the weeping Greek
That flattered Troy afire had been their Adam;
Liars, as if their mother had been made
Only of all the falsehood of the man,
Disposed into that rib: Do I know this,
And more: nay, all that can concern this Sex,
With the true end of my creation?
Can I with rational discourse sometimes
Advance my spirit into Heaven, before
'T has shook hands with my body, and yet blindly
Suffer my filthy flesh to master it,
With sight of such fair frail beguiling objects?
When I am absent, easily I resolve
Ne'er more to entertain those strong desires
That triumph ore me, even to actual sin;
Yet when I meet again those sorcerers eyes,
Their beams my hardest resolutions thaw,
As if that cakes of Ice and July met,
And her sighs powerful as the violent North,
Like a light feather twirl me round about
And leave me in mine own low state again.
What aylst thou? prithee weep not: Oh, those tears
If they were true, and righly spent, would raise
A flowery spring in the midst of January:
Celestial Ministers with Crystal cups
Would stoop to save 'em for immortal drink:
But from this passion; why all this?
Do'ye ask?
You are marrying: having made me unfit
For any man, you leave me fit for all:
Porters must be my burdens now, to live
And fitting me your self for Carts, and Beadles
You leave me to 'em: And who of all the world
But the virago, your great Arch-foes daughter?
But on: I care not, this poor rush: twill breed
An excellent comedy: ha, ha: 't'makes me laugh:
I cannot choose: the best is, some report
It is a match for fear, not love of your side.
Why how the devil knows she, that I saw
This Lady? are all whores, pieced with some witch?
I will be merry, faith it is true, sweet heart,
I am to marry?
Are you? you base Lord.
By ??? i'll Pistol thee.
A roaring whore?
Take heed, there's a correction house hard by:
You have learned this of your swordman, that I warned you of,
Your fencers, and your drunkards: but whereas
You upb aid me with oaths, why I must tell you
I nc're promised you marriage, nor have vowed,
But said I loved you, long as you remained
The woman I expected, or you swore,
And how you have failed of that (sweet heart) you know.
You fine would show your power, but fare you well,
Isle keep no more faith with an infidel.
Nor I my bosom for a Turk: do'ye hear?
Go, and the devil take me, if ever
I see you more: I was too true.
Come, pish:
That devil take the falsest of us two.
Amen.
You are an ill Clerk; and curse your self:
Madness transports you: I confess, I drew you
Unto my will: but you must know that must not
Make me dote on the habit of my sin.
I will, to settle you to your content,
Be master of my word: and yet he li'd
That told you I was marrying, but in thought:
But will you slave me to your tyranny
So cruelly I shall not dare to look
Or speak to other women? make me not
Your smocks Monopoly: come, let's be friends:
Look, her's a Jewel for thee: I will come
At night, and???
What in faith: you shall not sir.
Faith, and troth, and verily, but I will
Half drunk, to make a noise, and rail?
No, no,
Sober, and dieted for the nonce: I am thine,
I have won the day.
The night (though) shall be mine. 
What said he sirha?
Little, or nothing: faith I saw him not,
Nor will not: he doth love a strumpet, Mistress,
Nay, keeps her spitefully, under the Constables nose,
It shall be justified by the Gentleman
Your brothers Matter, that is now within
A'practicing: there are your Letters: come
You shall not cast your self away, while I live,
Nor will I venture my right worshipful place 
In such a business???here's your Mother: down: 
And he that loves you: another' gates fellow, I wish
If you had any grace.
Well rogue.
Isle in, to see Don Lucio manage: he'll make
A pretty piece of flesh; I promise you,
He do's already handle his weapon finely. 
She knows your love sir, and the full allowance
Her Father and my self approve it with,
And I must tell you, I much hope it hath
Wrought some impression, by her alteration;
She sighs, and says forsooth, and cries heigh ho,
She'll take ill words of the Steward, and the Servants,
Yet answer affably, and modestly:
Things sir, not usual with her: there she is,
Change some few words.
Madam, I am bound to 'ye;
How now, fair Mistress, working?
Yes forsooth,
Learning to live another day.
That needs not.
No forsooth: by my truly but it do's,
We know not what we may come too.
It is strange.
Come, I ha begged leave for you to play.
Forsooth
It is ill for a fair Lady to be idle.
She had better be well- busied, I know that.
Turtle: me thinks you morn, shall I sit by you?
If you be weary sir, you had best be gone
(I work not a true stitch) now you're my mate.
If I be so, I must doe more then side you.
Even what you will, but tread me.
Shall we bill?
Oh no, forsooth.
Being so fair, my Clara,
Why do'ye delight in black-worke?
Oh white sir,
The fairest Ladies like the blackest men:
I ever loved the colour: all black things
Are least subject to change.
Why, I doe love
A black thing too: and the most beauteous faces
Have oftenest of them: as the blackest eyes,
Jet-arched brows, such hair: i'll kiss your hand.
Twill hinder me work my sir: and my Mother
Will chide me, if I doe not doe my task.
Your Mother, nor your Father shall chide: you
Might have a prettier task, would you be ruled,
And look with open eyes.
I stare upon you:
And broadly see you: a wondrous proper man,
Yet it were a greater task for me to love you
Then I shall ever work sir, in seven year,
??? of this stitching, I had rather feel
Two, then sow one:??? this rogue he has given me a stitch
Clean cross my heart: good faith sir: I shall prick you.
In goodder faith, I would prick you again.
Now you grow troublesome: pish; the man is, foolish
Pray wear these trifles.
Neither you, nor trifles,
You are a trifle, wear your self, sir, out,
And here no more trifle the time away.
Come; you're deceived in me, I will not wake,
Nor fast, nor dye for you.
Goose, be not you deceived,
I can not like, nor love, nor live with you,
Nor fast, nor watch, nor pray for you.
Her old fit.
Sure, this is not the way: nay, I will break
Your melancholy.
I shall break your pate then,
Away, you sanguine scabbard.
Out upon thee 
Thou'lt break my heart, I am sure.
She's not yet tame.
On sir; put home: or I shall goad you here
With this old Fox of mine, that will bite better:
Oh, the brave age is gone; in my young days
A Chevalier would stock a needles point
Three times together: strait in the hams?
Or shall I gi'v'ye new Garters?
Faith old Master.
There's little hope: the linen sure was danck
He was begot in, he's so faint, and cold: 
Even send him to Toledo, there to study,
For he will never fadge with these Toledos;
Bear ye up your point there; pick his teeth: Oh' base.
Fie: you are the most untoward Scholar: bear
Your body gracefully: what a posture's there?
You lie too open breasted.
Oh!
You'd never
Make a good States-man:
Pray no more.
I hope to breath in peace, and therefore need not
The practise of these dangerous qualities,
I doe not mean to live by it; for I trust
You'll leave me better able.
Not a Button:
Let's go get us a new heir.
I by my troth: your daughter's as untoward.
I will break thee bone by bone, and bake thee,
Ere i'll have such a wooden Son, to inherit:
Take him a good knock; see how that will work.
Now, for your life Signior:
Oh: alas, I am killed
My eye is out: look Father: Zancho: ???
Isle play the fool no more thus, that I will not.
'Heart: ne'er a rogue in Spain shall wrong my brother
Whilst I can hold a sword.
Hold, Madam, Madam.
Clara.
Daughter.
Mistress:
Bradamante.
Hold, hold I pray.
The devil's in her, of the other side: sure,
There's Gold for you: they have changed what ye calt's:
Will no cure help? well, I have one experiment,
And if that fail, Isle hang him, then here's an end on it.
Come you along with me: and you sir: 
Now are you going to drowning. 
Isle even along with ye: she's too great a Lady
For me, and would prove more then my match. 
You're he spoke of Vitelli to the Steward?
Yes: and I thank you, you have beat me for it.
But are you sure you doe not wrong him?
Sure?
So sure, that if you please venture your self
Isle show you him, and his Cockatrice together,
And you shall hear 'em talk.
Will you? by ??? sir
You shall endear me ever: and I ask
You mercy.
You were somewhat boisterous.
There's Gold to make you amends: and for this pains,
Isle gratify you further: i'll but masque me
And walk along with ye: faith let's make a night on it. 
Come on my brave water-Spanlels: you that hunt Ducks in the night: and hide more knavery under your gowns then your betters: observe my precepts, and edify by my doctrine: at yond corner will I set you; if drunkards molest the street, &amp; fall to brabbling, knock you down the malefactors, and take you up their cloaks and hats, and bring them to me: they are lawful pri???sonars, and must be ransomed ere they receive liberty: what else you are to execute upon occasion, you suffice???ently know: and therefore I abbreviate my Lecture.
We are wise enough, and warm enough.
Vice this night shall be apprehended.
The terror of rug-gownes shall be known: and our bills
Discharge us of after recknings.
I will doe any thing, so I may eat.
Lazarillo, We will spend no more; now we are grown worse, we will live better: let us follow our calling faithfully.
Away, then the Common-wealth is our Mistress: and who
Would serve a common Mistress, but to gain by her? 
I pray you see the Masque, my Lord,
It is early night yet.
O if it be so late, take me along:
I would not give advantage to ill tongues
To tax my being here, without your presence
To be my warrant.
You might spare this, Sister,
Knowing with whom I leave you; one that is
By your allowance, and his choice, your Servant,
And may my council and persuasion work it,
Your husband speedily: For your entertainment
My thanks; I will not rob you of the means
To doe your Mistress some acceptable service
In waiting on her to my house.
My Lord,
As you respect me, without further trouble
Retire, and taste those pleasures prepared for you,
And leave me to my own ways.
When you please sir. 
You'll leave my Chamber?
Let us but bill once,
My Dove, my Sparrow, and I, with my office
Will be thy slaves for ever.
Are you so hot?
But taste the difference of a man in place,
You'll find that when authority pricks him forward,
Your Don, nor yet your Diego comes not near him
To doe a Lady right: no men pay dearer
For their stolen sweets, then we: three minutes trading
Affords to any sinner a protection
For three years after: think on that, I burn;
But one drop of your bounty.
Hence you rogue,
Am I fit for you? is it not grace sufficient
To have your staff, a bolt to bar the door
Where a Don enters, but that you'll presume
To be his taster?
Is no more respect
Due to this rod of justice?
Doe you dispute?
Good Doctor of the Dungeon, not a word more,
??? If you doe, my Lord Vitelli knows it.
Why I am big enough to answer him,
Or any man.
It is well. 
Malroda.
How?
You know the voice, and now crouch like a Cur
Tan worrying sheep: I now could have you gilded
For a Bawd rampani: but on this submission
For once I spare you
I Will be revenged
My honourable Lord.
There's for thy care
I am mad, starck mad: proud Pagan scorn her host
I would I were but valiant enough to kick her, 
Il'd wish no manhood else.
What's that?
I am gone. 
You see, I have kept my word.
But in this object
Hardly deserved my thanks.
Is there ought else
You will command me?
Only your sword
Which I must have: nay willingly I yet know
To force it, and to use it.
It is yours Lady.
I ask no other guard.
If so I leave you:
And now, if that the Constable keep his word,
A poorer man may chance to gull a Lord. 
By this good ??? you shall not.
By this???
I mu??????, and will, Malroda; What doe you make
A stranger of me?
Isle be so to you,
And you shall find it.
These are your old arts
T'endeere the game you know I come to hunt for,
Which I have borne too coldly.
Doe so still,
For if I h at you, hang me.
If you doe not
I know who'll starve for it: why, thou shame of women,
Whose folly, or whose impudence is greater
Is doubtful to det???rmine; this to me
That know thee for a whore.
And made me one,
Remember that.
Why should I but grow wise
And tie that bounty up, which nor discretion
Nor honour can give way too; thou would be
A Bawd ever twenty, and within a month
A barefoot, lousy, and diseased whore,
And shift thy lodgings oftner then a rogue
That's whipped from post to post.
Pish: all our College
Know you can rail well in this kind.
For me
He never spake so well.
I have maintained thee
The envy of great fortunes, made thee shine
As if thy name were glorious: stuck thee full
Of jewels, as the firmament of Stars,
And in it made thee so remarkable
That it grew questionable, whether virtue poor,
Or vice so set forth as it is in thee,
Were even by modesties self to be preferred,
And am I thus repaid?
You are still my debtor;
Can this (though true) be weighed with my lost honour,
Much less my faith? I have lived private to you,
And but for you, had ne'er known what lust was,
Nor what the sorrow for it.
It is false.
It is true,
But how returned by you, thy whole life being
But one continued act of lust, and Shipwreck
Of women's chastities.
But that I know
That she that dares be damned dares any thing,
I should admire thy tempting me: but presume not
On the power you think you hold o'er my affections,
It will deceive you: yield, and presently
Or by the inflamed blood, which thou must quench
Isle make a forcible entry.
Touch me not:
You know I have a throat, ??? if you doe
I will cry out a rape, or sheath this here,
Ere i'll be kept, and used for Julip-water
T'allay the heate which lushious meats and wine
And not desire hath raised.
A desperate devil,
My blood commands my reason: I must take
Some milder way.
I hope (dear Don) I fit you.
The night is mine, although the day was yours
You are not fasting now: this speeding trick
Which I would as a principle leave to all,
That make their maintenance out of their own Indies
As I doe now; my good old mother taught me,
Daughter, quoth she, contest not with your lover
His stomach being empty; let wine heat him,
And then you may command him: it is a sure one:
His looks show he is coming.
Come this needs not,
Especially to me: you know how dear
I ever have esteemed you.
Lost again.
That any sight of yours, hath power to change
My strongest resolution, and one tear
Sufficient to command a pardon from me,
For any wrong from you, which all mankind
Should kneel in vain for.
Pray you pardon those
That need your favour, or desire it
Prithee.
Be better tempered: Isle pay as a forfeit
For my rash anger, this purse filed with Gold.
Thou shalt have servants, gowns, attires, what not?
Only continue mine.
It was this I fished for
Look on me, and receive it.
Well, you know
My gentle nature, and take pride t'abuse it:
You see a trifle pleases me, we are friends;
This kiss, and this confirms it.
With my ruin.
I'll have this diamond; and this pearl.
They are yours.
But will you not, when you have what you came for,
Take them from me to morrow? tic a fashion
Your Lords of late have used.
But Isle not follow.
That any man at such a rate as this
Should pay for his repentance.
Shall we to bed now?
Instantly, Sweet: yet now I think on it better
Ther's something first that in a word or two
I must acquaint you with.
Can I cry aim,
To this against my self? Isle break this match,
Or make it stronger with my blood. 
I am yours,
A Don's not priviledgd here more then yourself,
Win her, and wear her.
Have you a Priest ready?
I have him for thee, Lad; and when I have
Married this scornful whore to this poor gallant.
She will make suit to me; there is a trick
To bring a high-priz'd wench upon her knees:
For you my fine neat Harpies stretch your talons
And prove your selves true night-Birds.
Take my word
For me and all the rest.
If there be meat
Or any banquet stirring, you shall see
How isle bestow my self.
When they are drawn,
Rush in upon 'em: al's fair prize you light on:
I must away: your officer may give way
To the Knavery of his watch, but must not see it.
You all know where to find me. 
There look for us.
Who's that?
My Piorato, welcome, welcome:
Faith had you not come when you did, my Lord
Had done I know not what to me.
I am gul'd,
First cheated of my Jewels, and then laughed at:
Sirha, what make you here?
A business brings me,
More lawful then your own,
How's that, you slave?
He's such, that would continue his a whore
Whom he would make a wife of.
Isle treed upon
The face you dote on, strumpet.
Keep the peace there.
A plot upon my life too?
Down with him.
Show your old valour, and learn from a woman,
One Eagle has a world of odds against
A flight of Daws, as these are.
Get you off,
Isle follow instantly.
Run for more help there. 
Loss of my gold, &amp; jewels, &amp; the wench too
Afflicts me not so much, as th'having Clara
The witness of my weakness.
He turns from me,
And yet I may urge merit, since his life
Is made my second gift.
May I ne'er prosper
If I know how to thank her.
Sir, your pa don
For pressing thus beyond a Virgins bounds
Upon your privacies: and let my being
Like to a man, as you are, be th'excuse
Of my soliciting that from you, which shall not
Be granted on my part, although desired
By any other: sir, you understand me,
And it would show nobly in you, to prevent
From me a farther boldness, which I must
Proceed in, if you prove not mercifuil,
Though with my loss of blushes, and good name.
Madam, I know your will, and would be thankful
If it were possible I could affect
The Daughter of an enemy.
That fair false one
Whom with fond dotage you have long pursued
Had such a father: she to whom you pay
Dearer for your dishonour, then all titles
Ambitious men hunt for are worth.
It is truth.
Yet, with her, as a friend you still exchange
Health for diseases, and to your disgrace
Nourish the rivals to your present pleasures,
At your own charge, used as a property
To give a safe protection to her lust,
Yet share in nothing but the shame of it.
Grant all this so, to take you for a wife
Were greater hazard, for should I offend you
(As tic not easy still to please a woman)
You are of so great a spirit, that I must learn
To wear your petticoat, for you will have
My breeches from me.
Rather from this hour
I here abjure all actions of a man,
And will esteem it happiness from you
To suffer like a woman: love, true love
Hath made a search within me, and expel'd
All but my natural softness, and made perfect
That which my parents care could not begin.
I will show strength in nothing, but my duty,
And glad desire to please you, and in that
Grow every day more able.
Could this be,
What a brave race might I beget? I find
A kind of yielding; and no reason why
I should hold longer out: she's young, and fair,
And chaste for sure, but with her leave the Devil
Durst not attempt her: Madam, though you have
A Soldiers arm, your lips appear as if
They were a Ladies.
They dare sir from you
Endure the trial.
Ha: once more I pray you:
The best I ever tasted; and tic said
I have proved many, it is not safe I fear
To ask the rest now: well, I will leave whoring
And luck herein send me with her: worthiest Lady,
Isle wait upon you home, and by the way
(If ere I many, as isle not forswear it)
Tell you, you are my wife.
Which if you do,
From me all man-kinde women, learn to woe. 
A cloak? good purchase, and rich hangers? well,
We'll share ten Pistolets a man
Yet still
I am monstrous hungry: could you not diduct
So much out of the gross some, as would purchase
Eight loins of Veale, and some two dozen of Capons?
O strange proportion for five.
For five? I have
A legion in my stomach that have kept
Perpetual fast these ten years: for the Capons,
They are to me but as so many black Birds:
May I but eat once, and be satisfied,
Let the fates call me, when my ship is fraught,
And I shall hang in peace.
Steal well to night,
And thou shalt feed to morrow; so now you are
Your selves again, isle raise another watch
To free you from suspicion: set on any
You meet with boldly: Isle not be far off,
T'assist you, and protect you. 
O brave officer.
Would every ward had one but so well given,
And we would watch for rug, in gowns of velvet.
Stand close: a prize.
Satin, and gold Lace, Lads.
Why dost thou hang upon me?
It is so dark
I dare not see my way: for heaven sake father
Let us go home.
No, even here we'll leave you:
Let's run away from him, my Lord.
Oh alas.
Thou hast made me mad: and I will beat thee dead
Then bray the in a mortar, and now mold thee
But I will alter thee.
Twill never be:
He has bin three days practising to drink,
Yet still he sips, like to a waiting woman,
And looks as he were murdering of a fart
Among wild Irish swaggerers.
I have still
Your good word, Zancho, father.
Milk-sop coward;
No house of mine receives thee: I disclam thee,
Thy mother; on her knees shall not entreat me
Hereafter to acknowledge thee.
Pray you speak for me.
I would; but now I cannot with mine honour.
Ther's only one course left, that may redeem thee,
Which is, to strike the next man that you meet,
And if we chance to light upon a woman,
Take her away, and use her like a man,
Or I will cut thy hamstrings.
This makes for us
What dost thou do now?
Sir, I am saying my prayers;
For being to undertake what you would have me,
I know I cannot live.
Madam, I fear
You'll wish you had used your coach: your brothers house
Is yet far off.
The better sir: this walk
Will help digestion after your great supper,
Of which I have fed largely.
To your task,
Or else you know what follows:
I am dying:
Now Lord have mercy on me: by your favour,
Sir I must strike you.
For what cause?
I know not:
And I must likewise talk with that young Lady,
An hour in private.
What you must, is doubtful,
But I am certain sir, I must beat you.
Help, help.
Not strike again?
How, Alvarez?
This for my Lord Vitell's love.
Break out,
And like true thieves, make pray on either side,
But seem to help the stranger.
Oh my Lord,
They have beat him on his knees.
Though I want courage:
I yet have a sons duty in me, and
Compassion of a fathers danger; that,
That wholly now possesses me.
Lucio.
This is beyond my hope.
So Lazarillo,
Take up all boy: well done.
And now steal off
Closely, and cunningly.
How? have I found you?
Why Gentlemen, are you mad, to make your selves
A prey to Rogues?
Would we were off.
Thieves, thieves.
Defer our own contention: and down with them.
Isle make you sure.
Now he plays the Devil.
This place is not for me. 
Isle follow her
Half of my penance is past ore. 
What noise?
What tumult's there? keep the Kings peace I charge you.
I am glad he's come yet.
O, you keep good Guard
Upon the City, when men of our rank
Are set upon in the streets.
The assistance
Shall hear os't be assured.
And if he be
That careful Governor he is reported,
You will smart for it.
Patience, good Signiours:
Let me survey the Rascals: O, I know them,
And thank you for them: they are pillfring rogues
Of Andaluzia, that have perused
All Prisons in Castle: I dare not trust
The dungeon with them: no, isle have them home
To my own house.
We had rather go to prison.
Had you so dog-holts? yes, I know you had:
You there would use your cunning fingers on
The simple locks; you would: but isle prevent you.
My Mistress lost? good night. 
Your Son's gon to,
What should become of him?
Come of him, what will:
Now he dares fight, I care not: i'll to bed:
Look to your prisoners Alguazier. 
Al's cleared:
Droop not for one disaster: let us hug,
And triumph in our knaveries.
This confirms
What was reported of him.
It was done bravely.
I must a little glory in the means
We officers have, to play the Knaves, and safely:
How we break through the toils, pitched by the Law,
Yet hang up them that are far less delinquents:
A simple shopkeeper's carted for a baud
For lodging (though unwittingly) a smock-Gamster:
Where, with rewards, and credit I have kept
Malroda in my house, as in a cloister,
Without taint, or suspicion.
But suppose
The Governor should know it?
He? good Gentleman,
Let him perplex himself with prying into
The measures in the market, and th'abuses
The day stands guilty of: the pillage of the night
Is only mine, mine own feesimple;
Which you shall hold from me, tenants at will,
And pay no rent for it.
Admirable Landlord.
Now we'll go search the taverns, commit such
As we find drinking: and be drunk our selves
With what we take from them: these silly wretches
Whom I for form sake only have brought hither
Shall watch without, and guard us.
And we will.
See you sase lodged, most worthy Alguazier,
With all of you his comrads.
Tic the Governor.
We are betrayed?
My guard there: bind them fast:
How men in high place, and authority
Are in their lives and estimation wronged
By their subordinate Ministers? yet such
They cannot but employ: wronged justice finding
Scarce one true servant in ten officers.
'T'xpostulate with you, were but to delay
Your crimes due punishment, which shall fall upon you
So speedily, and severely, that it shall
Fright others by th'example: and confirm
How ever corrupt officers may disgrace
Themselves, it is not in them to wrong their place.
Bring them away.
We'll suffer nobly yet,
And like to Spanish Gallants.
And we'll hang so.
I have no stomach to it: but i'll endeavour.
Nay you are rude; pray you forbear; your offer now
More then the breeding of a Gentleman
Can give you warrant for.
Tic but to kiss you,
And think not isle receive that for a favour
Which was enjoined me for a penance, Lady.
You have met a gentle confessor, and for once
(So men you will rest satisfied) I vouchsafe it.
Rest satisfied with a kiss? why can a man
Desire more from a woman? is there any
Pleasure beyond it? may I never live
If I know what it is.
Sweet Innocence.
What strange new motions do I feel? my veins
Burn with an unknown fire: in every part
I suffer alteration: I am poisoned,
Yet languish with desire again to taste it,
So sweetly it works on me.
I ne'er saw
A lovely man, till now.
How can this be?
She is a women???n, as my mother is,
And her I have kissed often, and brought off
My lips unscortch'd; yours are more lovely, Lady,
And so should be less hurtful: pray you vouchsafe
Your hand, to quench the heat tan from your Lip,
Perhaps that may restore me.
VVillinglie.
The flame increases: if to touch you, burn thus,
What would more strict embraces do? I know not,
And yet methinks to die so; were to ascend
To Heaven, through Paradise.
I am wounded too,
Though modesty forbids that I should speak
What ignorance makes him bold in: why do you fix
Your eyes so strongly on me?
Pray you stand still,
There is nothing else, that is worth the looking on:
I could adore you, Lady.
Can you love me?
To waite on you, in your chamber, and but touch
What you, by wearing it, have made divine,
Were such a happiness. I am resolved,
Isle sell my liberty to you for this glove,
And write my self your slave.
On easier terms,
Receive it as a friend.
How! giving favour!
I'll have it with his heart.
What will you doe?
As you are merciful, take my life rather.
Will you depart with it so?
Do's that grieve you?
I know not: but even now you appear valiant.
It was to preserve my father: in his cause
I could be so again.
Not in your own? Kneel to thy rival and thine enemy?
Away unworthy creature, I begin
To hate my self, for giving entrance to
A good opinion of thee: For thy torment,
If my poor beauty be of any power,
May thou dote on it desperately: but never
Presume to hope for grace, till thou recover
And wear the favour that was ravished from thee.
He wears my head to then.
Poor fool, farewell. 
My womanish soul, which hitherto hath governed
This coward flesh, I feel departing from me;
And in me by her beauty is inspired
A new, and masculine one: instructing me
What's fit to doe or suffer; powerful love
That hast with loud, and yet a pleasing thunder
Roused sleeping manhood in me, thy new creature,
Perfect thy work so that I may make known
Nature (though long kept back) will have her own.
Can it be possible, that in six short hours
The subject still the same, so many habits
Should be removed? or this new Lucio, he
That yesternight was baffeld and disgraced,
And thanked the man that did it, that then kneeled
And blubbered like a woman, should now dare
One term of honour seek reparation
For what he then appeared not capable of?
Such miracles, men that dare doe injuries
Live to their shames to see, and for punishment
And scourge to their proud follies.
Prithee leave me:
Had I my Page, or foot-man here to flesh thee,
I durst the better hear thee.
This scorn needs not:
And offer such no more.
Why say I should,
You'll not be angry?
Indeed I think I shall,
Would you vouchsafe to show your self a Captain,
And lead a little further, to some place
That's less frequented.
He looks pale.
If not,
Make use of this.
There's anger in his eyes too:
His gesture, voice, behaviour, all new fashioned;
Well, if it does endure in act the trial
Of what in show it promises to make good,
??lysses Cyclops, Io's transformation,
Eurydice fetched from Hell, with all the rest
Of Ovids Fables, isle put in your Creed;
And for proof, all incredible things may be
Writ down that Lucio, the coward Lucio,
The womanish Lucio fought.
and Lamorall,
The still employed great duellist Lamorall.
Took his life from him.
Twill not come to that sure:
Methinks the only drawing of my Sword
Should fright that confidence.
It confirms it rather.
To make which good, know you stand now opposed
By one that is your Rival, one that wishes
Your name and title greater, to raise his;
The wrong you did, less pardonable then it is,
But your strength to defend it, more then ever
It was when justice friended it. The Lady
For whom we now contend, Genevora
Of more desert, (if such incomparable beauty
Could suffer an addition) your love
To Don Vitelli multiplied, and your hate
Aagainst my father and his house increased;
And lastly, that the Glove which you there wear,
To my dishonour, (which I must force from you)
Were dearer to you then your life.
You'll find
It is, and so isle guard it:
All these meet then
With the black infamy, to be foiled by one
That's not allowed a man: to help your valour,
That falling by your hand, I may, or die,
Or win in this one single opposition
My Mistress, and such honour as I may
Enrich my fathers Arms with.
Tic said Nobly;
My life with them are at the stake.
At all then. 
She's yours: this, and my life, to follow your fortune;
And give not only back that part the looser
Scorns to accept of ???
What's that?
My poor life,
Which do not leave me as a further torment,
Having dispoild me of my Sword, mine honour,
Hope of my Ladies grace, fame, and all else
That made it worth the keeping.
I take back
No more from you, then what you forced from me;
And with a worser title: yet think not
That Isle dispute this, as made insolent
By my success, but as one equal with you,
If so you will accept me; that new courage,
Or call it fortune if you please, that is
Conferred upon me by the only sight
Of fair Genevora, was not bestowed on me
To bloody purposes: nor did her command
Deprive me of the happiness to see her
But till I did redeem her favour from you;
Which only I rejoice in, and share with you
In all you suffer else.
This courtesy
Wounds deeper then your Sword can, or mine own;
Pray you make use of either, and dispatch me.
The barbarous Turk is satisfied with spoil;
And shall I, being possessed of what I came for,
Prove the more Infidel?
You were better be so,
Then publish my disgrace, as tic the custom,
And which I must expect.
Judge better on me:
I have no tongue to trumpet mine own praise
To your dishonour: tic a bastard courage
That seeks a name out that way, no true born one;
Pray you be comforted, for by all goodness
But to her virtuous self, the best part of it,
I never will discover on what terms
I came by these: which yet I take not from you,
But leave you in exchange of them, mine own,
With the desire of being a friend; which if
You will not grant me, but on further trial
Of manhood in me, seek me when you please,
(And though I might refuse it with mine honour)
Win them again, and wear them: so good morrow. 
I ne'er knew what true valour was till now;
And have gained more by this disgrace, then all
The honours I have won: they made me proud,
Presumptuous of my fortune; a mere beast,
Fashioned by them, only to dare and doe:
Yielding no reasons for my wilful actions
But what I stuck on my Swords point, presuming
It was the best Revenue. How unequal
Wrongs well maintained makes us to others, which
Ending with shame teach as to know our selves,
I will think more on it.
Lamorall.
My Lord?
I came to seek you.
And unwillingly;
You ne'er found me till now: your pleasure sir?
That which will please thee friend: thy vowed love to me
Shall now be put in action: means is offered
To use thy good Sword for me; that which still
Thou worst, as if it were a part of thee.
Where is it?
Tic changed for one more fortunate:
Pray you enquire not how.
Why, I ne'er thought
That there was music int, but ascribe
The fortune of it to the arm.
Which is grown weaker too. I am not (in a word)
Worthy your friendship: I am one new vanquished,
Yet shame to tell by whom.
But Isle tell thee
Against whom thou art to fight, and there redeem
Thy honour lost, if there be any such:
The King, by my long suit, at length is pleased
That Alvarez and my self, with eiders Second,
Shall end the difference between our houses,
Which he accepts of I make choice of thee;
And where you speak of a disgrace, the means
To blot it out, by such a public trial
Of thy approved valour, will revive
Thy ancient courage. If you embrace it, doe;
If not, Isle seek some other.
As I am
You may command me.
Spoke like that true friend
That loves not only for his private end. 
This from Madonna Clara?
Yes, and 't please you.
Alvarez daughter?
The same, Lady.
She,
That saved my brothers life?
You are still in the right,
She wild me wait your walking forth: and knowing
How necessary a discreet wise man
Was in a business of such weight, she pleased
To think on me: it may be in my face
Your Ladyship not acquainted with my wisdom
Finds no such matter: what I am, I am;
Thought's free: and think you what you please.
Tic strange,
That I should be wise, Madam?
No, thou art so;
There's for thy pains: and prithee tell thy Lady
I will not fail to meet her: Isle receive
Thy thanks and duty in thy present absence:
Farewell, farewell, I say, now thou art wise. 
She writes here, she hath something to impart
That may concern my brothers life; I know not,
But general fame does give her out so worthy,
That I dare not suspect her: yet wish Lucio
Were Master of her mind: but fie upon it;
Why do I think on him? see, I am punished for it,
In his unlooked for presence: Now I must
Endure another tedious piece of Courtship,
Would make one forswear courtesy.
Gracious Madam,
The sorrow paid for your just anger towards me
Arising from my weakness, I presume
To press into your presence, and despair not
An easy pardon.
He speaks send: oh strange.
And yet believe, that no desire of mine,
Though all are too strong in me, had the power
For their delight, to force me to iufringe
What you commanded, it being in your part
To lessen your great rigour when you please,
And mine to suffer with an humble patience
What you'll impose upon it.
Courtly too.
Yet hath the poor, and contemned Lucio, Madam,
(Made able only by his hope to serve you)
Recovered what with violence, not justice,
Was taken from him: and here at your feet
With these, he could have laid the conquered head
Of Lamorall (tic all I say of him)
For rudely touching that, which as a relic
I ever would have worshipped, since it was yours.
Valiant, and every thing a Lady could
Wish in her servant.
All that's good in me,
That heavenly love, the opposite to base lust,
Which would have all men worthy, hath created;
Which being by your beams of beauty formed,
Cherish as your own creature.
I am gone
Too far now to dissemble: rise, or sure
I must kneel with you too: let this one kiss
Speak the rest for me: tic too much I doe,
And yet, if chastity would, I could wish more.
In overjoying me, you are grown sad;
What is it Madam? by???
There's nothing that's within my nerves (and yet
Favoured by you, I should as much as man)
But when you please, now or on all occasions
You can think of hereafter, but you may
Dispose of at your pleasure.
If you break
That oath again, you lost me. Yet so well
I love you, I shall never put you to it;
And yet forget it not: rest satisfied
With that you have received now: there are eyes
May be upon us, till the difference
Between our friends are ended: I would not
Be seen so private with you.
I obey you.
But let me hear oft from you, and remember
I am Vitellies sister.
What's that Madam?
Nay nothing, fare you well: who feels loves fire,
Would ever ask to have means to desire. 
Are they come in?
Yes.
Read the Proclamation,
That all the people here assembled may
Have satisfaction, what the Kings dear love,
In care of the Republique, hath ordained;
Attend with silence: read aloud.
FOrasmuch as our high and mighty Master, Philip, the potent and most Catholic King of Spain, hath not only in his own Royal person, been long, and often solicited, and grieved, with the deadly and uncurable hatred, sprung up be???twixt the two ancient and most honourably discen???ded Houses of these his two dearly and equally be???loved Subjects, Don Ferdinando de Alrarez, and Don Pedro de Vitelli: (all which in vain his Majesty hath often endeavoured to reconcile and qualify:) But that also through the debates, quarrels, and outrages daily arising, falling, and flowing from these great heads, his public civil Government is seditiously and barbarously mole???sted and wounded, and many of his chief Gentry (no less tender to his Royal Majesty then the very branches of his own sacred blood) spoiled, lost, and submerged, in the impious inundation and torrent of their still-growing malice: It hath therefore pleased His sacred Majesty, out of His infinite af???fection to preserve his Common-wealth, and gene???rall peace, from farther violation, (as a sweet and heartily loving father of his people) and on the earnest petitions of these Arch-enemies, to Order, and Ordain, That they be ready, each with his wel-chosen and beloved friend, armed at all points like Gentlemen, in the Castle of St. Jago, on this present Monday morning betwixt eight and nine of the clock; where (before the combatants be allowed to commence this granted Duel) This to be read aloud for the public satisfaction of his Maje???sties welbeloved Subjects.
Hark how their Drums speak their insatiate thirst
Of blood, and stop their ears against pious peace,
Who gently whispering, implores their friendship?
Kings, nor authority can master fate;
Admit 'em then, and blood extinguish hate.
Stay, yet be pleased to think, and let not daring
Wherein men nowadays exceed even beasts,
And think themselves not men else, so transport you
Beyond the bounds of Christianity:
Lord Alvarez, Vitelli, Gentlemen,
No Town in Spain, from our Metropolis
Unto the rudest hovel, but is great
With your assured valours daily proofs:
Oh will you then, for a superfluous fame,
A sound of honour, which in these times, all
Like heretics profess (with obstinacy)
But most erroneously, venture your souls,
Tic a hard tasque, thorough a Sea of blood
To sail, and land at Heaven?
I hope not
If justice be my Pilot: but my Lord,
You know, if argument, or time, or love,
Could reconcile, long since we had shook hands;
I dare protest, your breath cools not a vein
In any one of us, but blows the fire
Which nought but blood reciprocal can quench.
Vitelli, thou say bravely, and say right,
And I will kill thee for it, I love thee so.
Ha, ha, old man: upon thy death Isle build
A story (with this arm) for thy old wife
To tell thy daughter Clara seven years hence
As she sits weeping by a wintet fire,
How such a time Vitelli slew her husband
With the same Sword his daughter favoured him,
And lives, and wears it yet: Come Lamorall,
Redeem thy self.
Lucio, Genevora
Shall on this Sword receive thy bleeding heart,
For my presented hat, laid at her feet.
Thou talk well Lamorall, but tic thy head
That I will carry to her to thy hat:
Fie father, I do cool too much.
Oh boy:
Thy fathers true son:
Beat Drums,???and so good morrow to your Lordship.
Brave resolutions.
Brave, and Spanish right.
Lucio.
Vitelli.
Alvarez.
How the devil
Got these Cats into the gutter? my pusse too?
Hear us.
We must be heard.
We will be heard
Vitelli; look, see Clara on her knees
Imploring thy compassion: Heaven, how sternly
They dart their emulous eyes, as if each scorned
To be behind the other in a look!
Mother, death needs no Sword here: oh my sister
(Fate fine would have it so) persuade, entreat,
A Ladies tears are silent Orators
(Or should be so at least) to move beyond
The honest tongu'd-Rethoritian:
Why will you fight? why do's an uncles death
Twenty year old, exceed your love to me
But twenty days? whose forced cause, and fair manner
You could not understand, only have heard.
Custom, that wrought so cunningly on nature
In me, that I forgot my sex, and knew not
Whether my body female were, or male,
You did unweave, and had the power to charm
A new creation in me, made me fear
To think on those deeds I did perpetrate,
How little power though you allow to me
That cannot with my sighs, my tears, my prayers
Move you from your own loss, if you shoule gain.
I must forget you Clara, 'till I have
Redeemed my uncles blood, that brands my face
Like a pestiferous Carbuncle: I am blind
To what you doe: deaf to your cries: and Marble
To all impulsive exorations.
When on this point, I have perched thy fathers soul,
Isle tender thee this bloody reeking hand
Drawn forth the bowels of that murderer:
If thou can love me then, i'll marry thee,
And for thy father lost, get thee a Son;
On no condition else.
Most barbarous.
Savage.
Irreligious.
Oh Lucio!
Be thou more merciful: thou bear fewer years,
Art lately weaned from soft effeminacy,
A maidens manners, and a maidens heart
Are neighbours still to thee: be then more mild,
Proceed not to this combat; be thou desperate
Of thine own life? yet (dearest) pity mine
Thy valour's not thine own, I gave it thee,
These eyes begot it, this tongue bred it up,
This breast would lodge it: doe not use my gifts
To mine own ruin: I have made thee rich,
Be not so thankless, to undo me for it.
Mistress, you know I doe not wear a vain.
I would not rip for you, to doe you service:
Life's but a word, a shadow, a melting dream,
Compared to essential, and eternal honour.
Why, would you have me value it beyond
Your brother: if I first cast down my sword
May all my body here, be made one wound,
And yet my soul not find heaven thorough it.
You would be catter-walling too, but peace,
Go, get you home, and provide dinner for
Your Son, and me: we will be exceeding merry:
Oh Lucio, I will have thee cock of all
The proud Vitellies that doe live in Sprine:
Fie, we shall take cold: hunch:??? I am hoarse
Already.
How your Sister whets my spleen!
I could eat Lucio now:
Lamorall: you have often sworn
You'd be commanded by me.
Vitelli, Brother,
Even for your Fathers soul, your uncles blood,
As you doe love my life: but last, and most
As you respect your own Honour, and Fame,
Throw down your sword; he is most valiant
That herein yields first.
Peace, you fool.
Why Lucio,
Doe thou begin; it is no disparagement:
He's elder, and thy better, and thy valour
Is in his infancy.
Or pay it me,
To whom thou ow'st it: Oh, that constant time
Would but go back a week, then Lucio
Thou would not dare to fight.
Lucio, thy Mother,
Thy Mother begs it: throw thy sword down first.
Isle throw his head down after then.
Lamorall.
You have often swore you'd be commanded by me.
Never to this: your spite, and scorn Genevora,
He has lost all power in me:
Your hearing for six words.
Say. An. Strange obstinacy!
We will stay no longer.
Then by thy oath Vitelli,
Thy dreadful oath, thou would return that sword
When I should ask it, give it to me, now,
This instant I require it.
By thy vow,
As dreadful, Lucio, to obey my will
In any one thing I would watch to challenge,
I charge thee not to strike a stroke: now he
Of our two brothers that loves perjury
Best, and dares first be damned, infringe his vow.
Excellent Ladies.
Pish you tyrannise.
We did equivocate.
On.
Then Lucio,
So well I love my husband, for he is so,
(wanting but ceremony) that I pray
His vengeful sword may fall upon thy head
successfully for false-hood to his Sister.
I likewise pray (Vitelli) Lucio's sword
(who equally is my husband, as thou hers)
May find thy false heart, that durst gage thy faith,
And durst not keep it.
Are you men, or stone.
Men, and we will prove it with our swords:
Your hearing for six words, and we have done,
Zancho come forth???we will fight our challenge too: 
Now speak your resolutions. 
These they are,
The first blow given betwixt you, sheathes these swords
In one another bosoms.
And rogue, look
You at that instant doe discharge that Pistol
Into my breast: if you start back, or quake,
Isle stick you like a Pig.
??? hold: you are mad.
This we said: and by our hope of bliffe
This we will doe: speak your intents.
Strike.
Shoot.
Vit. Lu. La. Hold, hold: all friends.
Come down.
These devilish women
Can make men friends and enemies when they list.
A gallant undertaking and a happy;
Why this is noble in you: and will be
A well comer present to our Master Philip
Then the return from his Indies. 
Father your blessing.
Take her: if he bring not
Betwixt you, boys that will find out new worlds,
And win 'em too I'm a false Prophet.
Brother.
There is a Sister: long divided streams
Mix now at length, by fate.
I am not regarded: I was the careful Steward that provided these Instruments of peace, I put the longest weapon in your Sisters hand, (my Lord) because she was the shortest Lady: For likely the shortest Ladies, love the longest???men: And for mine own part, I could have discharged it: my Pistol is no ordinary Pistol, it has two ramming Bullets; but thought I, why should I shoot my two bullets into my old Lady? if they had gon, I would not have staid long after: I would even have died too, bravely y'faith, like a Roman-Steward: hung my self in mine own Chain; and there had been a story of Bobadilla, Spindola, Zancho, for after ages to lament: hum: I perceive I am not only not regarded, but also not rewarded.
Prithee peace: shalt have a new chain, next
Saint Iaques day, or this new gilt:
I am satisfied: let virtue have her due: And yet i am melancholy upon this atonement: pray heaven the State rue it not: I would my Lord Vitellies Steward, and I could meet: they should find it should cost 'em a little more to make us friends: well, I will forswear wine, and women for a year: and then I will be drunk to morrow, and run a whoring like a dog with a broken bottle it's tail; then will I repent next day, and forswear 'em again more vehemently: be forsworn next day again, and repent my repentance: for thus a melancholy Gentleman doth, and ought to live.
Nay, you shall dine with me: and afterword
Isle with 'ye to the King: But first, I will
Dispatch the Castles business, that this day
May be complete. Bring forth the malefactors. 
You Alguazier, the Ringleader of these
Poor fellows, are degraded from your office,
You must restore all stolen goods you received,
And watch a twelve month without any pay:
This, if you fail of, (all your goods confiscate)
You are to be whipped, and sent into the Galleys.
I like all, but restoring that Catholic doctrine
I doe dislike: Learn all ye officers
By this to live uprightly (if you can) 
You Cobbler, to translate your manners new,
Are doomed to the Cloister of the Mendicants,
With this your brother; botcher there, for nothing
To cobble, and heel hose for the poor Friars,
Till they allow your penance for sufficient,
And your amendment; then you shall be freed,
And may set up again,
Mendoza, come.
Our souls have trod awry, in all men's sight,
We will underlay 'em, till they go upright. 
Smith, in those shackles you for your hard heart
Must lye by th'heeles a year.
I have shod your horse, my Lord. 
Away: for you, my hungry white-loaf'd face,
You must to the Galleys, where you shall be sure
To have no more bits, then you shall have blows.
Well, though herrings want, I shall have rows.
Signior, you have prevented us, and punished
Your self severeller then we would have done.
You have married a whore: may she prove honest.
It is better my Lord, then to marry an honest wo???man
That may prove a whore.
It is a handsome wench: and thou can keep her tame:
Isle send you what I promised.
Joy to your Lordships.
Here may all Ladies learn, to make of foes
The perfect'st friends: and not the perfect'st foes
Of dearest friends, as some doe now a days.
Behold the power of love, to nature lost
By custom irrecoverably, past the hope
Of friends restoring, love hath here retrieved
To her own habit, made her blush to see
Her so long monstrous metamorphoses,
May strange affairs never have worse success. 
Our Auhor fears there are some Rebel hearts,
Whose dullness doth oppose loves piercing darts;
Such will be apt to say there wanted wit,
The language low, very few scaenes are writ
With spirit and life; such odd things as these
He cares not for, nor ever means to please;
For if your selves a Mistress or loves friends,
Are liked with this smooth Play he hath his ends.
STatues and Pictures challenge price and fame;
If they can justly boast, and prove they came
From Phidias or Apelles. None deny,
Poets and Painters hold a sympathy;
Yet their works may decay and lose their grace,
Receiving blemish in their limbs or face.
When the minds art has this pre-eminence,
She still retains her first excellence.
Then why should not this dear piece be esteemed
Child to the richest fancies that ere teem'd?
When not their meanest off-spring, that came forth,
But bore the image of their fathers worth.
Beaumonts, and Fletchers, whose desert outwayes
The best applause, and their least sprig of Baize
Is worthy Phoebus; and who comes to gather
Their fruits of wit, he shall not rob the treasure.
Nor can you ever surfeit of the plenty,
Nor can you call them rare, though they be dainty:
The more you take, the more you do them right,
And wee will thank you for your own delight.

