SIgnior Don Diego, and mine Host, save thee.
I thank you Mr Bailey.
O the block.
Why, how should I have answered?
Not with that
Negligent rudeness: But I kiss your hands
Signior Don Incubo de Hambre, and then
My titles; Master Bailey of Castil-blanco:
Thou ne'er wilt have the elegance of an Host;
I sorrow for thee, as my friend and gossip:
No smoke, nor steam out-breathing from the kitchen?
There's little life in the harth then.
I, there, there,
That is his friendship, harkening for the spit,
And sorrow that he cannot smell the pot boil.
Strange
An Inn should be so cursed, and not the sign
Blasted, nor withered; very strange, three days now,
And not an egg eat in it, or an onion.
I think they have strewed the high-wayes with cal-traps, I,
No horse dares pass 'em; I did never know
A week of so sad doings, since I first
Stood to my sign-post.
Gossip, I have found
The root of all; kneel, pray, it is thy self
Art cause thereof: each person is the founder
Of his own fortune, good, or bad; but mend it,
Call for thy cloak, and rapier.
How?
Do, call,
And put 'em on in haste: Alter thy fortune,
By appearing worthy of her: Dost thou think
Her good face ere will know a man in cuerpo?
In single body, thus? in hose, and doblet?
The horse boys garb? base blank, and half blank cuerpo?
Did I, or Mr Dean of Civil our neighbor
Ere reach our dignities in cuerpo, think thou,
In squirting hose, and doublet? Signior, no,
There went more to it: there were cloaks, gowns, cassocks
And other paramentos; Call, I say,
His cloak, and rapier here. 
What means your worship?
Bring forth thy husbands Sword: so hang it on,
And now his cloak, here, cast it up; I mean
Gossip, to change your luck, and bring you guests.
Why? is there charm in this?
Expect; now walk,
But not the pace of one that runs on errands;
For want of gravity in an Host, is odious:
You may remember Gossip, if you please,
(Your wife being then the Infant of the Gipsies,
And your self governing a great mans Mules then)
Me a poor Squire at Madrid attending
A Master of Ceremonies; But a man, believe it,
That knew his place to the gold weight, and such
Have I heard him oft say, ought every Host
Within the Catholic kings dominions
Be in his own house.
How?
A Master of Ceremonies:
At least vice-master, and to do nought in cuerpo,
That was his maxim; I will tell thee of him:
He would not speak with an Ambassadors Cook,
See a cold bake-meat from a foreign part
In cuerpo: had a dog but staid without,
Or beast of quality, as an English cow,
But to present it self, he would put on
His Savoy chain about his neck, the ruff
And cuffs of Holland, then the Naples hat
With the Rome hat-band, and the Florentine agate,
The Millain Sword, the Cloak of Genua, set
With Flemish buttons, all his given pieces
To entertain 'em in, and complement 
With a tame Coney, as with the Prince that sent it.
List, who is there?
A guest and 't be thy will.
Look Spouse, cry luck, and we be encountered: ha?
Luck then, and good, for it is a fine brave guest,
With a brave horse.
Why now, believe of cuerpo 
As you shall see occasion: go, and meet him.
Look to my horse, I pray you, well.
He shall Sir.
Oh how beneath his rank and call was that now?
Your horse shall be entreated as becomes
A horse of fashion, and his inches.
O.
Look to the Cavalier: what ails he? stay
If it concern his horse, let it not trouble him,
He shall have all respect the place can yield him
Either of barley, or fresh straw.
Good Sir
Look up.
He sincks, somewhat to cast upon him,
He will go away in cuerpo else.
What, wife!
O your hot waters quickly, and some cold
To cast in his sweet face.
Alas, fair flower?
Do's any body entertain his horse?
Yes, Lazaro has him.
Go you see him in person.
Sir, taste a little of this, of mine own water,
I did distil't my self; sweet Lily look upon me,
You are but newly blown, my pretty Tulip.
Faint not upon your stalk, it is firm and fresh
Stand up, so, bolt upright, you are yet in growing.
Pray you let me have a chamber.
That you shall Sir.
And where I may be private, I entreat you.
For that in truth Sir, we have no choice: our house
Is but a vent of need, that now and then
Receives a guest, between the greater towns
As they come late; only one room,
She means Sir, it is none
Of those wild, scattered heaps, called Innes, where scarce
The Host is heard, though he wind his horn t'his people,
Here is a competent pile, wherein the man,
Wife, Servants, all doe live within the whistle
Only one room.
A pretty modest quadrangle
She will describe to you.
Wherein stands two Beds Sir
We have, and where, if any guest do come,
He must of force be lodged, that is the truth Sir.
But if I pay you for both your beds, methinks
That should alike content you.
That it shall Sir.
If I be paid, I am pried.
Why, ther's a Ducats
Will that make your content?
O the sweet face on you:
A Ducats? yes, and there were three beds Sir,
And twice so many rooms, which is one more,
You should be private in 'em all, in all Sir,
No one should have a piece of a bed with you
Not Master Deane of Civil himself, I swear
Though he came naked hither, as once he did
When h'had like to have been tan a bed with the Moore
And guelt by her Master: you shall be as private,
As if you lay in's own great house, that's haunted,
Where no body comes, they say:
I thank you Hostess.
Pray you will you show me in.
Yes marry will I Sir,
And pray that not a flea, or a chink vex you
You forget supper: Gossip: move for supper
It is strange what love to a beast may do, his Horse
Threw him into this fit.
You shall excuse me
It was his being in Cuerpo, merely cause it.
Do you think so Sir?
Most unlucky Cuerpo,
Nought else, he looks as he would eat partridge,
This guest; have you em ready in the house?
And a fine piece of kid now? and fresh garlic,
With a Sardine, and Zant oil? how now?
Has he bespoke? what will he have a brace,
Or but one partridge, or a short legged hen,
Daintily carbonado'd?
'Lasse the dead
May be as ready for a Supper as he.
Ha?
He has no mind to eat, more then his shadow:
Say you.
How do's your worship
I put on
My left shoo first to day, now I perceive it,
And skipped a bead in saying 'em ore; else
I could not be thus crossed: He cannot be
Above seventeen; one of his years, and have
No better a stomach?
And in such good clothes too
Nay, those do often make the stomach worse, wife,
That is no reason.
I could at his years Gossips
(As temperate as you see me now) have eaten
My brace of ducks, with my half goose, my cony,
And drink my whole twelve Marvedis in wine
As easy as I now get down three olyffs.
And with your temperance-favour, yet I think
Your worship would put to it at six and thirty
For a good wager; and the meal in too.
I do not know what mine old mouth can do,
I ha not proved it lately
That's the grief Sir.
But is he without hope then gone to bed?
I fear so Sir, has locked the door close to him
Sure he is very ill.
That is with fasting,
You should ha told him Gossip, what you had had,
Given him the inventury of your kitchen,
It is the picklock in an Inn, and often
Opens a close barred stomach: what may he be trob?
Has he so good a Horse?
Oh a brave Janet,
As ere your worship saw.
And he eats
Strongly,
A mighty solascisme, heaven give me patience,
What creatures has he?
None.
And so well clothed,
And so well mounted?
That's all my wonder Sir,
Who he should be; he is attired and horsed
For the Constables son of Spain.
My wonders more
He should want appetite: well a good night
To both my Gossips: I will for this time
Put off the thought of supping; In the morning
Remember him of breakfast pray you,
'T shall Sir,
A hungry time Sir.
We that live like mice
On others meat, must watch when we can get it 
Yes, but I would not tell him: Our fair guest
Says, though he eat no supper, he will pay for one.
Good news: we will eat it spouse, 't his health,
It was politically done t'admit no sharers.
Look to the Mules there, wher's mine Host?
Here Sir.
Another Fayerie.
Bless me.
From what sweet Hostess?
Are you afraid of your guests?
From Angels Sir,
I think ther's none but such come here to night,
My house had never so good luck before
For brave fine guests; and yet the ill luck on it is
I cannot bid you welcome.
No?
Not lodge you Sir.
Not, Hostess?
No in troth Sir, I do tell you
Because you may provide in time: my beds
Are both tan up by a young Cavalier
That will, and must be private.
He has paid Sir
For all our Chambers.
Which is one: and Beds
Which I already have told you are two: But Sir,
So sweet a creature, I am very sorry
I cannot lodge you by him; you look so like him
Yo'are both the loveliest pieces.
What train has he?
None but himself.
And will no less then both deds
Serve him?
He has given me a ducats for 'em.
O.
You give me reason Hostess: Is he handsome,
And young do you say?
O Sir, the delicat'st flesh
And finest clothes withal, and such a horse,
With such a Saddle.
Shoe's in love with all.
The horse, and him, and Saddle, and clothes: good woman,
Thou justifiest thy Sex; love all that's brave:
Sure though I lye of the ground, isle stay here now
And have a sight of him: you'll give me house-room,
Fire, and fresh meat for money: gentle Hostess
And make me a palate?
Sir she shall do reason:
I understood you had another guest: Gossips
Pray you let his Mule be looked too: have good straw,
And store of bran: And Gossip do you hear,
Let him not stay for supper: what good foul have you?
This gentleman would eat a pheasant.
'Lass Sir;
We have no such.
I kiss your hands fair Sir.
What have you then? speak what you have? I 'me one Sir
Here for the Catholic King, an Officer
To enquire what guests come to these places; you Sir
Appear a person of quality, and it is fit
You be accommodated: why speak you not,
What have you woman? are you afraid to vent
That which you have?
This is a most strange man;
'T appoint my meat.
The half of a cold hen Sir,
And a boiled quarter of kid, is all in the house.
Why ell's but cold; let him see it fourth,
Cover, and give the eye some satisfaction,
A Travellers stomach must see bread and salt,
His belly is nearer to him, then his kindred:
Cold hen 's a pretty meat Sir.
What you please;
I am resolved to obey.
So is your kid,
With pepper, garlic, and the juice of an Orange,
She shall with salads help it, and clean linen;
Dispatch: what news at Court Sir?
Faith new tires
Most of the Ladies have: the men old Suits,
Only the Kings fool has a new coat
To serve you.
I did guess you came from thence Sir.
But I do know I did not.
I mistook Sir.
What hear you of the Archdukes?
Troth your question.
Of the French business, What?
As much.
No more?
They say the French: O that's well: come I'll help you:
Have you no jibblets now? or a broild rasher
Or some such present dish t'assist?
Not any Sir.
The more your fault; you nev'r should be without
Such aids: what cottage would have lacked a pheasant
At such a time as this? well, bring your hen,
And kid forth quickly.
That should be my prayer
To scope his inquisition.
Sir, the French,
They say are divided about their match with us,
What think you of it.
As of nought to me Sir.
Nay it's as little to me too: but I love
To ask after these things, to know the affections
Of States, and Princes, now and then for bettring.
Of your own ignorance.
Yes Sir:
Many do so.
I cannot live without it: what do you hear
Of our Indian Fleet; they say they are well returned.
I had no venture with 'em Sir; had you?
Why do you ask Sir?
Because it might concern you,
It do's not me.
O here's your meat come.
Thanks,
I welcome it at any price.
Some stools here,
And bid mine Host bring Wine, isle try your kid,
If he be sweet: he looks well: yes, he is good;
Isle carve you sir.
You use me too too princely:
Taste, and carve too.
I love to do these offices.
I think you do: for whose sake?
For themselves sir,
The very doing of them is reward.
'Had little faith would not believe you Sir.
Gossip some wine. 
Here it is: and right St Martin.
Measure me out a glass.
I love the humanity
Used in this place:
Sir, I salute you here.
I kiss your hands Sir.
Good wine; it will beget an appetite:
Fill him; and sit down, Gossip, entertain
Your noble guest here, as becomes your title.
Please you to like this wine Sir?
J dislike
Nothing mine Host, but that I may not see
Your concealed guest: here's to you.
In good faith Sir,
I wish you as well as him: would you might see him.
And wherefore may he not:
'Has locked himself Sir
Up, and has hired both the beds of my wife
At extraordinary rate.
Isle give as much
If that will do it, for one, as he for both;
What say you mine Host, the door once open
Isle fling my self upon the next bed to him
And there's an end of me till morning; noise
I will make none.
I wish your worship well ???but
His honour is engaged: And my she Gossip
Hath past her promise, hath she not?
Yes truly:
That touches to the credit of the house:
Well, I will eat a little, and think: how say you sir
Unto this brawn of the hen?
I have more mind
To get this bed sir.
Say you so: Why then
Gived me again, and drink to me: mine Host
Fill him his wine: you're dull, and dost not praise it,
I eat but to teach you the way Sir.
Sir:
Find but the way to lodge me in this chamber
Isle give mine Host two ducats for his bed,
And you sir two reels: here's to you
Excuse me,
I am not mercenary: Gossip pledge him for me,
Isle think a little more; but even one bit
And then talk on: you cannot interrupt me.
This piece of wine sir cost me
Stay: I have found:
This little morsel: and then: here's excellent garlic:
Have you not a bunch of grapes now: or some Bacon
To give the mouth a relish?
Wife, do you hear?
It is no matter. Sir, give mine Host your ducats.
How Sir?
Do you receive 'em: I will save
The honesty of your house: and yours too Gossip,
And I will lodge the Gentleman: show the Chamber.
Good Sir do you hear.
Show me the Chamber.
Pray you Sir,
Do not disturb my guests.
Disturb? I hope
The Catholic King sir, may command a lodging
Without disturbing in his vassails house,
For any Minister of his, employed
In business of the State. Where is the door?
Open the door, who are you there? within?
In the Kings name. 
What would you have?
Your key sir,
And your door open: I have here command
To lodge a Gentleman, from the Justice, sent
Upon the Kings affairs.
Kings and necessities
Must be obeyed:' the key is under the door.
How now sir, are you fitted? you secured?
Your two reals are grown a piece of eight.
Excuse me Sir.
Twill buy a hen; and wine
Sir, for to morrow. 
I do kiss your hands Sir
Well this will bear my charge yet to the Galleys
Where I am owing a ducats: whither this night
By the Moons leave Isle march: for in the morning
Early they put from Port S. Maries. 
Lazaro 
How do the horses?
Would you would go and see Sir,
A ??? of all Jades, what a clap he has given me:
As sure as you live master he knew perfectly
I couzend him on's Oats: he looked upon me
And then he sneerd, as who should say take heed sirrah:
And when he saw our half peck, which you know
Was but an old Court dish: lord how he stamped:
I thought 't had been for joy, when suddenly
He cuts me a back caper with his heels
And takes me just of the crupper: down came I
And all my ounce of Oats: Then he neighed out
As though he had had a Mare by the tail.
Faith Lazaro
We are to blame to use the poor dumb serviters
So cruelly.
Yonder's this other gentleman's horse
Keeping our Lady eve: the devil a bit
Has got since he came in yet: there he stands
And looks, and looks, but it is your pleasure sir
He shall look lean enough: has hay before him
But it is as big as hemp, and will as soon choke him,
Unless he eat it buttered: he had four shoos
And good ones when he came: it is a strange wonder
With standing still he should cast three.
O Lazaro
The devils in this trade: truth never knew it
And to the devil we shall travel Lazaro
Unless we mend our manners: once every week
I meet with such a knock to mollify me
Sometimes a dozen to awake my conscience
Yet still I sleep securely.
Certain Master
We must use better dealing.
Faith for mine own part
Not to give ill example to our issues,
I could be well content to steal but two girths,
And now and then a saddle cloth: change a bridle
Only for exercise.
If we could stay there
There were some hope on's Master: but the devil is
We are drunk so early we mistake whole Saddles
Sometimes a horse; and then it seems to us too
Every poor Jade has his whole peck, and tumbles
Up to his ears in clean straw, and every bottle
Shows at the least a dozen; when the truth is Sir
Ther's no such matter, not a smell of provender,
Not so much straw, as would tie up a horse tail,
Nor any thing in the rack, but two old cobwebs
And so much rotten hay as had been a hens nest.
Well, these mistakings must be mended Lazaro,
These apparitions, that abuse our senses,
And make us ever apt to sweep the manger
But put in nothing; these fancies must be forgot
And we must pray it may be revealed to us
Whose horse we ought in conscience to cousin,
And how, and when: A Parsons horse may suffer
A little greasing in his teeth, it is wholesome;
And keeps him in a sober shuffle: and his Saddle
May want a stirrup, and it may be sworn
His learning lay on one side, and so broke it:
Has ever Oats in's cloak-bag to prevent us
And therefore it is a meritorious office
To tithe him soundly.
And a Grazier may
For those are pinching puckfoysts and suspicious:
Suffer a mist before his eyes sometimes too,
And think hee sees his horse eat half a bushel:
When the truth is, rubbing his gums with salt,
Till all the skin come off: he shall but mumble
Like an old woman, that were chewing brawn,
And drop 'em out again.
That may do well too,
And no doubt it is but venial: But good Lazaro
Have you a care of understanding horses,
Horses with angry heels, gentlemen's horses,
Horses that know the world: let them have meat
Till their teeth ache; and rubbing till their ribs
Shine like a wenches forehead; they are devils
And look into our dealings: as sure as we live
These Courtiers horses are a kind of Welsh prophets,
Nothing can be hid from 'em: For mine own part
The next I cozen of that kind, shall be founderd,
And of all four too: Isle no more such complements
Upon my crupper.
Steal but a little longer
Till I am lamed too, and we'll repent together,
It will not be above two days.
By that time
I shall be well again, and all forgot Sir.
Why then isle stay for thee. 
Oh,???ho-? oh???ho?
Ha?
Oh???oh? heart???heart???heart???heart?
What's that?
When wilt thou break???? break, break, break?
Ha?
I would the voice were strong, or I nearer,
Shame, shame, eternal shame? what have I done?
Done?
And to no end: what a wild Journey
Have I more wildly undertaken?
Journey?
How without counsel? care? reason? or fear?
Whither will this fit carry?
O my folly:
This is no common sickness.
How have I left
All I should love, or keep? ?? heaven.
Sir.
Ha?
How do you gentle Sir?
Alas my fortune
It seems your sorrow oppresses: please your goodness
Let me bear half Sir: a divided burden
Is so made lighter.
Oh,
That sigh betrays
The fullness of your grief:
I, if that grief
Had not bereft me of my understanding,
I should have well remembered where I was,
And in what company; and clapped a lock
Upon this tongue for talking.
Worthy Sir
Let it not add to your grief, that I have heard
A sigh, or groan come from you: That is all Sir:
Good Sir no more: you have heard too much I fear,
Would I had taken poppy when I spake it.
It seems you have an ill belief of me
And would have feared much more, had you spoke ought
I could interpret. But believe it Sir
Had I had means to look into your breast,
And tan you sleeping here, that so securely
I might have read, all that your woe would hide
I would not have betrayed you.
Sir that speech
Is very noble, and almost would tempt
My need to trust you.
At your own election,
I dare not make my faith so much suspected
As to protest again: nor am I curious
To know more then is fit.
Sir I will trust you
But you shall promise Sir to keep your bed,
And whatsoever you hear, not to importune
More I beseech you from me.
Sir I will not.
Then I am proan to utter.
My faith for it.
If I were wise, I yet should hold my peace
You will be noble.
You shall make me so
If you'll but think me such.
I do: then know
You are deceived with whom you have talk so long.
I am a most unfortunate lost woman.
Ha?
Do not stir Sir: I have here a Sword.
Not I sweet Lady: of what blood, or name.
You'll keep your faith.
Isle perish else.
Believe then
Of birth too noble for me, so descended???
I am ashamed, no less then I am affrighted.
Fear not: by all good things, I will not wrong you.
I am the daughter of a noble Gentleman
Born in this part of Spain: my fathers name Sir:
But why should I abuse that reverence
When a child's duty has forsaken me.
All may be mended: in fit time too: speak it
Alphonso, sir.
Alphonso? what's your own name?
Any base thing you can invent.
Deal truly.
They call me Theodosia
Ha? and love
Is that that hath changed you thus?
Ye have observed me
Too nearly Sir, it is that indeed: it is love Sir.
And love of him (oh heavens) why should men deal thus?
Why should they use their arts to cozen us?
That have no cunning, but our fears about us?
And ever that too late to; no dissembling
Or double way but doting: too much loving?
Why should they find new oaths, to make more wretches?
What may his name be?
Sir a name that promises
Me thinks no such ill usage: Mark-antonio
A noble neighbours Son: Now I must desire ye
To stay a while: else my weak eyes must answer.
I will: ???Are ye yet ready? what is his quality?
His best a thief Sir: that he would be known by;
Is, heir to Leonardo, a rich Gentleman:
Next, of a handsome body, had heaven made him
A mind fit to it. To this man, my fortune,
(My more then purblind fortune) grave my faith???
Drawn to it by as many shows of service
And signs of truth, as ever false tongue uttered:
Heaven pardon all.
It is well said: forward Lady.
Contracted Sir, and by exchange of rings
Our souls delivered: nothing left unfinished
But the last work, enjoying me, and Ceremony.
For that I must confess was the first wise doubt
I ever made: yet after all this love sir,
All this profession of his faith; when daily
And hourly I expected the blessed priest
Hee left me like a dream, as all this story
Had never been, nor thought of, why I know not;
Yet I have called my conscience to confession,
And every syllable that might offend
I have had in shrift: yet neither loves law Seignior,
Nor tie of maidens duty, but desiring
Have I transgressed in: left his father too,
Nor whither he is gone, or why departed
Can any tongue resolve me: All my hope
(Which keeps me yet alive, and would persuade me
I may be once more happy, and thus shapes me
A shame to all my modest sex) is this Sir,
I have a Brother and his old Companion,
Student in Sallimanca, there my last hope
If hee bee yet alive, and can be loving
Is left me to recover him: For which travel
In this Suit left at home of that dear Brothers
Thus as you find me, without fear, or wisdom,
I have wandered from my father, fled my friends,
And now am only child of hope and danger:
You are now silent Sir: this tedious story
(That ever keeps me waking) makes you heavy:
It is fit it should do so: for that, and I
Can be but troubles.
No, I sleep not Lady:
I would I could: oh heaven is this my comfort.
What ail you gentle Sir?
Oh.
Why do you groan so?
I must, I must; oh misery.
But now Sir
You were my comfort: if any thing afflict ye
Am not I fit to bear a part on it? and by your own rule.
No; if you could heal, as you have wounded me,
But it is not in your power.
I fear intemperance.
Nay do not seek to shun me: I must see you:
By heaven I must: hoe, there mine Host: a Candle:
Strive not, I will not stir ye.
Noble Sir
This is a breach of promise.
Tender Lady
It shall be none but necessary: hoe, there,
Some light, some light for heavens sake.
Will ye betray me?
Are ye a gentleman?
Good woman:
Sir. 
If I be prejudicial to you, curse me.
Ye are early stirring sir.
Give me your Candle
And so good morrow for a while.
Good morrow Sir. 
My Brother Don Philippo: nay Sir, kill me
I ask no mercy Sir, for none dare know me,
I can deserve none: As ye look upon me
Behold in infinite these foul dishonours
My noble father, then your self: last all
That bear the name of kindred, suffer in me:
I have forgot whose child I am, whose Sister:
Do you forget the pity tied to that:
Let not compassion sway you: you will be then
As foul as I, and bear the same brond with me,
A favourite of my fault: ye have a sword sir,
And such a cause to kill me in.
Rise Sister:
I wear no sword for women: nor no anger
While your fair chastity is yet untouched.
By those bright stars, it is Sir.
For my Sister
I do believe ye: and so near blood has made us
With the dear love I ever bore your virtues
That I will be a Brother to your griefs too:
Be comforted, it is no dishonour Sister
To love, nor to love him you do: he is a gentleman
Of as sweet hopes, as years, as many promises,
As there be growing truths, and great ones.
O sir!
Do not despair.
Can ye forgive?
Yes Sister,
Though this be no small error, a far greater.
And think me still your Sister?
My dear Sister.
And will you counsel me?
To your own peace too:
Ye shall love still.
How good ye are?
My business,
And duty to my father, which now drew me
From Salimanca, I will lay aside
And only be your Agent to persuade ye
To leave both love, and him, and well retire ye.
Oh gentle Brother.
I perceive it is folly:
Delays in love, inore dangerous.
Noble Brother.
Fear not, isle run your own way: and to help you,
Love having racked your passions beyond counsel:
Isle hazard mine own fame: whither shall we venture?
Alas, I know not Sir.
Come, it is bright morning
Let's walk out, and consider: you'll keep this habit.
I would sir.
Then it shall be: what must I cal ye?
Come, do not blush: pray speak, I may spoil all else.
Pray cal me Theodoro. 
Are ye ready?
The day draws on a pace: once more good morrow.
Good morrow gentle Host: now I must thank ye:
Who dost thou think this is?
Were you a wench Sir
I think you would know before me.
Mine own Brother.
By the Mass your noses are a kin: should I then
Have been so barbarous to have parted Brothers?
You knew it then.
I knew it was necessary
You should be both together: Instinct Signior
Is a great matter in an Host.
I am satisfied. 
Is not mine Host up yet?
Who's that?
Isle see.
Sister, withdraw your self.
Seignior Philippo
Noble Don Pedro, where have you been this way?
I came from Port St Maries, whence the Galleys
Put this last tide, and bound for Barcelona,
I brought Mark-antonie upon his way.
Marc-antonie?
Who is turned Soldier
And entertained in the new Regiment,
For Naples.
Is it possible?
I assure you.
And put they in at Barcelona?
So
One of the Masters told me.
Which way go you Sir?
Home:
And I for Civil: pray you Sir, say not
That you saw me, if you shall meet the question,
I have some little business
Were it less Sir.
It shall not become me, to loose the caution:
Shall we break-fast together?
Isle come to you Sir:
Sister you hear this: I believe your fortune
Begins to be propitious to you: we will hire
Mules of mine host here: if we can himself
To be our guide, and straight to Barcelona,
This was as happy news, as unexpected
Stay you, till I rid him away.
I will. 
KNock at the door.
It is open Sir.
That's all one
Knock when I bid you.
Will not your worship enter.
Will not you learn more manners Sir, and do that
Your Master bids ye; knock ye knave, or isle knock
Such a round peal about your pate; I enter
Under his roof, or come to say god save ye
To him, the Son of whose base dealings has undone me.
Knock louder, louder yet: isle starve, and rot first,
This open air is every mans.
Come in Sir.
No, no Sir, I am none of these come in Sirs
None of those visitants: bid your wise Master
Come out, I have to talk unto him: go Sir
Your worship may be welcome.
Sir, I will not,
I come not to be welcome: good my three ducats
My pickell'd sprat a day, and no oil to it,
And once a year a cotton coat, leave prating
And tell your Master, I am here.
I will Sir.
This is a strange old man. 
I welcome to him!
Isle be first welcome to a Post-house: Sirhah
Lets have your valour now casde up, and quiet
When an occasion calls, it is wisdom in ye,
A Serving mans discretion: if you do draw
Draw but according to your entertainment;
Five nobles worth of fury.
Seignior Alphonso.
I hope no discontent from my will given,
Has made ye shun my house: I ever loved ye.
An credit me amongst my fears it is greatest
To minister offences.
O good Seignior
I know ye for Italian breed, fair tongued,
Spare your Appologies, I care not for'em,
As little for your love Sir; I can live
Without your knowledge; eat mine own, and sleep
Without dependences, or hopes upon ye.
I come to ask my daughter.
Gentle Sir.
I am not gentle Sir, nor gentle will be
Till I have justice, my poor child restored
Your caper-cutting boy has run away with
Young Signior-smooth-face, he that takes up wenches
With smiles, and sweet behaviours, songs, and sonnets,
Your high fed Janet, that no hedge can hold
They say you bred him for a Stallion.
Fie Seignior, there be times, and terms of honour
To argue these things in, descidements able
To speak ye noble gentlemen, ways punctual
And to the life of credit, ye are too rugged.
I am too tame Sir.
Will ye hear but reason?
No, I will hear no reason: I come not hither
To be popped off with reason; reason then.
Why Signior, in all things there must be method
Ye choke the child of honour else, discretion,
Do you conceive an injury?
What then Sir?
Then follow it in fair terms, let your sword bite
When time calls, not your tongue.
I know Sir
Both when and what to do without directions,
And where, and how, I come not to be tutur'd,
My cause is no mans but mine own: you Signior
Will ye restore my daughter?
Who detains her?
No more of these slight shifts
Ye urge me Signior
With strange unjustice: because my Son has erred
Mark him.
Out of the heat of youth: dost follow
I must be father of his crimes.
I say still
Leave off your rhetoric, and restore my daughter.
And suddenly: bring in your rebel too,
Mountdragon, he that mounts without commission
That I may see him punished, and severely,
Or by that holy heaven, isle fire your house,
And ther's my way of honour.
Pray give me leave
Was not man made the noblest creature
Well Sir.
Should not his mind then answer to his making,
And to his mind his actions, if this ought to be,
Why do we run a blind way from our words,
And cancel our discretions, doing those things
To cure offences, are the most offences?
We have rules of justice in us; to those rules
Let us apply our angers: you can consider
The want in others of these terminations,
And how unfurnished they appear.
Hang others,
And where the wrongs are open, hang respects,
I come not to consider.
Noble Sir,
Let us argue coolly, and consider like men.
Like men!
Ye are too sudden still.
Like men Sir?
It is fair language, and allied to honour.
Why, what strange beast would your grave re???verence
Make me appear? like men!
Taste but that point Sir,
And ye recover all.
I tell thy wisdom
I am as much a man, and as good a man.
All this is granted Sir.
As wise a man.
Ye are not tainted that way.
And a man
Dares make thee no man; or at best, a base man.
Fie, Fie, here wants much carriage.
Hang much carriage.
Give me good language sirrah Seignior.
Give me my daughter.
I am as gentle as your self, as free born.
Observe his way.
As much respect owed to me.
This hangs together nobly.
And for Civil
A great deal more it seems: go look your daughter.
There ye went well off Seignior.
That rough tongue
You understand at first: you never think Sir
Out of your mightiness, of my loss: here I stand
A patient anvil, to your burning angers
Made subject to your dangers; yet my loss equal:
Who shall bring home my son?
A whipping Beadle.
Why, is your daughter whorish?
Ha, thou dare not,
By heaven I know thou dare not.
I dare more Sir
If you dare be uncivil.
Laugh too, Pigeon.
A fitter time for fems sake: two weak Nurses
Would laugh at this; are there no more days coming,
No ground but this to argue on? no swords left
Nor friends to carry this, but your own furies?
Alas! it shows too weakly.
Let it show,
I come not here for shows: laugh at me sirrah?
Isle give ye cause to laugh.
Ye are as like Sir
As any man in Spain.
By heaven I will,
I will brave Leonardo.
Brave Alphonso,
I will expect it then.
Hold ye there both,
These terms are noble.
Ye shall hear shortly from me.
Now discreetly.
Assure your self ye shall: do ye see this sword Sir?
He has not cast his teeth yet.
Rarely carried.
He bites deep: most times mortal: Seignior
Isle hound him at the fair and home.
Still nobly.
And at all those that dare maintain ye.
Excellent.
How you shall please Sir, so it be fair, though cer???tain,
I had rather give you reason.
Fairly urged too.
This is no age for reason, prick your reason
Upon your swords point.
Admirably followed.
And there isle hear it: so till I please, live Sir. 
And so farewell, you're welcome.
The end crowns all things
Seignior, some little business past, this cause isle argue
And be a peace between ye, left so please ye,
And by the square of honour to the utmost:
I feel the old man's mastered by much passion,
And too high racked, which makes him overshoot all.
His valour should direct at, and hurt those
That stand but by as blenchers: this he must know too,
As necessary to his judgement, doting women
Are neither safe nor wise adventures: conceive me,
If once their wills have wandered; nor is it then
A time to use our rages: for why should I
Bite at the stone, when he that throws it wrongs me?
Do not we know that women are most wooers
Though closest in their carriage? Do not all men know,
Scarce all the compass of the globe can hold 'em
If their affections be afoot? shall I then covet
The follies of a she-fool, that by nature
Must seek her like, by reason be a woman,
Sink a tal ship because the sales defy me?
No, I disdain that folly; he that ventures
Whilst they are fit to put him on, has found out
The everlasting motion in his scabbard.
I doubt not to make peace: and so for this time
My best love, and remembrance.
Your poor Servant. 
Where will our Horses meet us?
Fear not you Sir,
Some half mile hence, my worships man will stay us,
How is it with my young bloods? come, be jovial,
Let's travel like a merry flock of wild geese,
Every tongue talking.
We are very merry;
But do you know this way Sir?
Is it not dangerous?
Methinks these woody thickets should harbour knaves.
I fear none but fair wenches: those are thieves
May quickly rob me of my good conditions
If they cry stand once: but the best is Signiours
They cannot bind my hands; for any else,
They meet an equal knave, and there's my passport:
I have seen fine sport in this place, had these trees tongues,
They would tell ye pretty matters: do not you fear though
They are not every days delights.
What sport Sir?
Why to say true, the sport of all sports.
What was it?
Such turning up of taffataes; and you know
To what rare whistling tunes they go, far beyond
A soft wind in the shrouds: such stand there,
And down ith tother place; such supplications
And subdivisions for those toys their honours,
One, as ye are a gentleman in this bush,
And oh sweet Sir, what mean ye? ther's a bracelet,
And use me I beseech ye like a woman,
And her petition's heard: another scratches,
And cries she will die first, and then swones: but certain
She is brought to life again, and does well after.
Another save mine honour, oh mine honour,
My husband serves the Duke, Sir, in his kitchen;
l have a cold pie for ye; fie, fie, fie gentlemen,
Will nothing satisfy ye, whore's my husband?
Another cries, do ye see Sir how they use me,
Is there no law for these things?
And good mine Host,
Do you call these fine sports?
What should I call 'em,
They have been so called these thousand years &amp; upwards.
But what becomes of the men?
They are stripped and bound,
Like so many Adams, with fig leafs before 'em,
And there's their innocence.
Would we had known this?
Before we reached this place.
Come, there's no danger,
These are but sometimes chances.
Now we must through.
Who's that?
Stand to it Signiors.
No it needs not,
I know the face; it is honest.
What mine Host:
Mine everlasting honest Host.
Mass Bailey:
Now in the name of an ill reckoning
What make you walking this round?
A ??? of this round,
And of all business too, through woods, and rascals,
They have rounded me away a dozen ducats,
Besides a fair round cloak: Some of 'em knew me,
Else they had cased me like a cony too,
As they have done the rest, and I think roasted me,
For they began to baste me soundly: my young Signiors,
You may thank heaven, and heartily, and hourly,
You set not out so early; ye had been smoked else
By this true hand ye had Sirs, finely smoked,
Had ye been women, smocked too.
Heaven defend us.
Nay, that had been no prayer, there were those
That run that prayer out of breath, yet failed too:
There was a Fryer, now ye talk of prayer,
With a huge bunch of beads, like a rope of onions;
I am sure as big, that out of fear and prayer,
In half an hour wore 'em as small as bugles,
Yet he was fleaed too.
At what hour was this?
Some two hours since.
Do you think the passage sure now.
Yes, a rope take 'em, as it will, and bless 'em,
They have done for this day sure.
Are many riffled?
At the least a dozen,
And there left bound.
How came you free?
A courtesy
They use out of their rogueships, to bequeath
To one, that when they give a sign from far
Which is from out of danger; he may presently
Release the rest, as I met you, I was going,
Having the sign from yonder hill to do it.
Alas poor men.
Mine Host, pray go untie'em.
Let me alone for cancelling: where are they?
In every bush like black birds, you cannot miss 'em
I need not stalk unto 'em. 
No, they'll stand ye,
My busy life for yours Sir: you would wonder
To see the several tricks, and strange behaviors
Of the poor rascals in their miseries,
One weeps, another laughs at him for weeping,
A third is monstrous angry he can laugh
And cries, go too, this is no time; he laughs still,
A fourth exhorts to patience: him a fifth man
Curses for tameness; him a Fryer schools,
All hoot the Fryer: here one sings a Ballad,
And there a little Curate confutes him,
And in this linsey woolsey way, that would make a dog
Forget his dinner, or an old man fire
They rub out for their ransoms: Amongst the rest,
There is a little Boy robed, a fine child,
It seems a Page: I must confess my pity
(As it is a hard thing in a man of my place)
To show compassion, stirred at him; so finely
And without noise he carrys his afflictions,
And looks as if he had but dreamt of loosing.
This boy's the glory of this robbery,
The rest but shame the action: now ye may hear 'em.
Come lads, it is holy-day: hang clothes, it is hot,
And sweating agues are abroad.
It seems so;
For we have met with rare Physicians
To cure us of that malady.
Fine footing,
Light and deliver: now my boys: Master Fryer,
How do's your holiness, bear up man; what
A cup of neat sack now and a toast: ha, Fryer,
A warm plaster to your belly Father,
There were a blessing now.
Ye say your mind Sir.
Where my fine Boy: my pointer.
Ther's the wonder.
A rank whore scratch their sides till the pox follow
For robbing thee, thou hast a thousand ways
To rob thy self boy, dice, and a chamber devil.
Ye are deceived Sir.
And thy Master too Boy.
A sweet faced Boy indeed: what rogues were these?
What barbarous brutish slaves to strip this beauty?
Come hither my boy: alas! he's cold, mine Host,
We must entreat your Cloak.
Can ye entreat it.
We do presume so much, you have other gar???mints.
Will you entreat those too?
Your Mule must too,
To the next town, you say it is near; in pity
You cannot see this poor Boy perish.
I know ye have a better soul, we will satisfy ye.
It is a strange foolish trick I have, but I cannot help it,
I am ever cozened with mine own commendations;
It is determined then I shall be robbed too.
To make up vantage to this dozen: here Sir,
Heaven has provided ye a simple garment
To set ye off: pray keep it hansomer
Then you kept your own, and let me have it rendered,
Brushed, and discreetly folded.
I thank ye Sir.
Who wants a doblet?
I.
Where will you have it?
From you Sir, if you please.
Oh, there's the point Sir.
My honest friends, I am sorry for your fortunes,
But that's but poor relief; here are ten Ducats,
And to your distribution holy Sir,
I render 'em: and let it be your care
To se 'em, as your wants are, well divided.
Plain dealing now my friends: and Father Fryer,
Set me the saddle right; no wringing Fryer,
Nor tithing to the Church, these are no duties;
Scour me your conscience, if the Devil tempt ye
Off with your cord, and swing him.
Ye say well Sir.
Heaven keep your goodness.
Peace keep you, farewell friends
Farewell light horse-men. 
Which way travel you Sir.
To the next town.
Do you want any thing.
Only discretion to travel at good hours,
And some warm meat to moderate this matter,
For I am most outrageous cruel hungry
I have a stomach too such as it is
Would pose a right good pasty, I thank heaven for it.
Chees that would break the teeth of a new hand-saw,
I could endure now like an Ostrich, or salt beeffe
That Caesar left in pickell.
Take no care,
We'll have meat for you and enough: I the mean time
Keep you the horse way lest the fellow miss us,
We will meet ye at the end of the wood.
Make hast then.
My pretty Sir, till your necessities
Be full supplied, so please you trust our friendships,
We must not part.
Ye have pulled a charge upon ye,
Yet such a one, as ever shall be thankful.
Ye have said enough: may I be bold to ask ye,
What Province you were bred in? and of what parents?
Ye may Sir: I was born in Andoluzia,
My name Francisco, son to Don Henriques
De Cardinas.
Our noble neighbour.
Son to Don Henriques:
I know the gentleman: and by your leave Sir,
I know he has no son.
None of his own Sir,
Which makes him put that right upon his brother
Don Zanchio's children: one of which I am,
And therefore do not much err.
Still ye do Sir,
For neither has Don Zanchio any son;
A daughter, and a rare one is heir,
Which though I never was so blessed to see,
Yet I have heard great good of.
Urge no further,
He is ashamed, and blushes.
Sir,
If it might import you to conceal your self,
I ask your mercy, I have been so curious:
Alas! I must ask yours Sir: for these lies,
Yet they were useful ones; for by the claiming
Such noble parents, I believed your bounties
Would show more gracious: The plain truth is gentlemen,
I am Don Sanchios stewards son, a wild boy,
That for the fruits of his unhappiness,
Is feign to seek the wars.
This is a lie too.
If I have any ears.
Why?
Mark his language,
And ye shall find it of too sweet a relish
For one of such a breed: isle pawn my hand,
This is no boy.
No boy? what would you have him?
I know, no boy: I watched how fearfully,
And yet how suddenly he cured his lies,
The right wit of a woman: Now I am sure.
What are ye sure?
That it is no boy: isle burn in it.
Now I consider better, and take council,
Methinks he shows more sweetness in that face,
Then his fears dare deliver.
No more talk on it,
There hangs some great weight by it: soon at night
Isle tell ye more.
Come Sir, what ere you are
With us, embrace your liberty, and our helps
In any need you have.
All my poor service
Shall be at your command Sir, and my prayers.
Let's walk a pace; hunger will cut their throats else. 
Call up the Master.
Here Sir. 
Honest Master,
Give order all the Gallys with this tide
Fall round, and near upon us; that the next wind
We may weigh off together, and recover
The Port of Barcelona, without parting.
Your pleasures done Sir. 
Signior Markantonio,
Till meat be ready, let's sit here and prepare
Our stomachs with discourses.
What you please Sir.
Pray ye answer me to this doubt.
If I can Sir.
Why should such plants as you are, pleasures i will???drone
That ow their blushing years to gentle objects,
Tenderly bred, and brought up in all fullness,
Desire the stubborn wars?
In those it is wonder,
That make their ease their god, and nor their honour:
But noble General, my end is other,
Desire of knowledge Sir, and hope of tying
Discretion to my time, which only shows me,
And not my years, a man, and makes that more.
Which we call handsome, the rest is but boys beauty,
And with the boy consumed.
Ye argue well Sir.
Nor do I wear my youth, as they were breches
For object, but for use: my strength for danger,
Which is the liberal part of man, not dalliance,
The wars must be my Mistress Sir.
O Seignior,
You'll find her a rough wench.
When she is won once,
She'll show the sweeter Sir.
You can be pleased, though
Sometimes to take a tamer?
It is a truth Sir,
So she be handsome, and not ill conditioned.
A Soldier should not be so curious.
I can make shift with any for a heat Sir.
Nay, there you wrong your youth too: and however
You are pleased to appear to me, which shows well Signior,
A tougher soul then your few years can testify;
Yet my young Sir, out of mine own experience
When my spring was, I am able to confute ye,
And say, y' had rather come to the shock of eyes,
And boldly march up to your Mistress mouth,
Then to the Cannons.
That's as their lading is Sir.
There be Trenches
Fitter, and warmer for your years, and safer
Then where the bullet plays.
Ther's it I doubt Sir.
You'll easily find that faith: But come, be liberal,
What kind of woman could you make best wars with?
They are all but heavy marches.
Fie Marckantonio,
Beauty in no more reverence?
In the Sex Sir,
I honour it, and next to honour, love it,
For there is only beauty; and that sweetness
That was first meant for modesty: sever it
And put it in one woman, it appears not.
It is of too rare a nature, she too gross
To mingle with it.
This is a mere heresy.
Which makes 'em ever mending; for that gloss
That cousins us for beauty, is but bravery,
An outward show of things well set, no more,
For heavenly beauty, is as heaven it self Sir,
Too excellent for object, and what is seen
Is but the vail then, airy clouds; grant this
It may be seen, it is but like stars in twinklings.
It was no small study in their Libraries
Brought you to this experience: But what think ye
Of that fair red and white, which we call beauty?
Why? it is our creature Sir, we give it 'em,
Because we like those colours, else it is certain
A blew face with a motley nose would do it,
And be as great a beauty, so we loved it,
That we cannot give, which is only beauty,
Is a fair Mind.
By this rule, all our choices
Are to no ends.
Except the dull end, Doing.
Then all to you seem equal?
Very true Sir,
And that makes equal dealing: I love any
That's worth love.
How long love ye Seignior?
Till I have other business.
Do you never
Love steadfastly one woman?
It is a toil Sir
Like riding in one rode perpetually,
It offers no variety.
Right youth,
He must needs make a Soldier; nor do you think
One woman, can love one man.
Yes that may be,
Though it appear not often; they are things ignorant,
And therefore opted to that superstition
Of doting fondness; yet of late years Signior,
That worlds well mended with 'em, fewer are found now
That love at length, and to the right mark, all
Stir now as the time stirs; fame and fashion
Are ends they aim at now, and to make that love
That wiser ages held ambition;
They that cannot reach this, may love by Index;
By every days surveying who best promises,
Who has done best, who may do, and who mended
May come to do again: who appears neatest
Either in new stamped cloths, or courtesies,
Done but from hand to mouth neither; nor love they these things
Longer then new are making, nor that succession
Beyond the next fair feather: Take the City,
There they go to it by gold weight, no gain from 'em
All they can work by fire and water to 'em,
Profit is all they point at: if there be love
It is showed ye by so dark a light, to bear out
The bracks, and old stains in it, that ye may purchase
French velvet better cheap: all loves are endless.
Faith, if ye have a Mistress, would she heard you.
It were but the venturing of my place, or swearing
I meant it but for argument, as Schoolmen
Dispute high questions.
What a world is this
When young men dare determine what those are?
Age and the best experience ne'er could aim at.
They were thick eyed then Sir; now the print is bigger,
And they may read their fortunes without spectacles.
Did you ne'er love?
Faith yes, once after supper,
And the fit held till midnight.
Hot, or shaking.
To say true, both.
How did ye rid it?
Thus Sir,
I laid my hand upon my heart, and blessed me,
And then said over certain charms I had learned
Against mad dogs, for love, and they are all one;
Last thought upon a windmill, and so slept,
And was well ever after.
A rare Physician,
What would your practise gain ye?
The wars ended,
I mean to use my heart, and have these fools
Cut in the head like Cats, to save the Kingdom,
Another Inquisition.
So old a Soldier.
Out of the wars, I never knew yet practised.
I shall mend every day; But noble General,
Believe this, but as this you named discourses.
O ye are a cunning Gamester.
Mirths and toys
To cousin time withal, for O my troth Sir,
I can love; I think, well too; well enough
And think as well of women as they are,
Pretty fantastic things, some more regardful,
And some few worth a service: I am so honest,
I with 'em all in heaven, and you know hard Sir
Twill be to get in there with their great farthingalls.
Well Marckantonio, I would not loose thy company
For the best. Galley I command.
Faith General,
If these discourses please ye, I shall fit ye
Once every day. 
Thou can not please me better: hark, they call
Below to Didner: ye are my Cabin guest,
My bosom's, so you please Sir.
Your poor Servant. 
Let 'em have meat enough woman, half a hen;
There be old rotten pilchers, put 'em off too,
It is but a little new anointing of 'em,
And a strong onion, that confounds the stink.
They call for more Sir.
Knock a dozen eggs down,
But then beware your wenches.
More then this too?
Worts, worts, and make 'em porridge: pop 'em up
But they shall pay for Cullyses.
All this is nothing;
They call for kid and partridge.
Well remembered,
Whore's the half Falconers dog he left?
It stinks Sir,
Past all hope that way.
Run it o'er with garlic,
And make a Roman dish on it.
Pray ye be patient,
And get provision in; these are fine Gentlemen,
And liberal Gentlemen; they have unde quare
No mangy Muleteers, nor pinching Posts
That feed upon the parings of musk-millions
And radishes, as big and tough as rafters:
Will ye be stirring in this business? here's your brother
Mine old Host of Ossuva, as wise as you are,
That is, as knavish; if ye put a trick,
Take heed he do not find it.
Isle be wagging.
It is for your own commodity: why wenches.
Anon for sooth. 
Who makes a fire there? and who gets in water?
Let Oliver go to the Justice, and beseech his worship
We may have two spits going; and do you here Druce,
Let him invite his worship, and his wives worship,
To the left meat to morrow. 
Whore's the Kitchen?
Even at the next door Signior: what old Don?
We meet but seldom.
Prithee be patient Hostess,
And tell me where the meat is.
Faith Master Bailey,
How have ye done? and how man?
Good sweet Hostess,
What shall we have to dinner?
How do's your woman,
And a fine woman she is and a good woman,
Lord, how you bear your years?
Is it veal, or mutton,
Beef, bacon, pork, kid, pheasant, or all these,
And are they ready all?
The hours that have been
Between us two, the merry hours: Lord!
Hostess,
Dear Hostess do but hear; I am hungry.
Ye are merrily disposed Sir.
Monstrous hungry,
And hungry after much meat, I have brought hither
Right worshipful to pay the reckoning,
Money enough too with 'em, desire enough
To have the best meat, and of that enough too:
Come to the point sweet wench, and so I kiss thee.
Ye shall have any thing, and instantly
Ere you can lick your ears, Sir.
Portly meat,
Bearing substantial stuff, and fit for hunger:
I do beseech ye Hostess first, then some light garnish,
Two pheasants in a dish, if ye have leverits,
Rather for way of ornament, then appetite
They may be looked upon, or larks: for fish,
As there is no great need, so I woul I not wish ye
To serve above four dishes, but those full ones;
Ye have no cheese of Parma?
Very old Sir.
The less will serve us, some ten pound,
Alas Sir,
We have not half these dainties.
Peace good Hostess,
And make us hope ye have.
Ye shall have all Sir,
That may be got for money.
Whore's your Master?
Bring me your Master boy: I must have liquor
Fit for the Mermedons; no dashing now child,
No conjurings by candle light, I know all;
Strike me the oldest Sack, a piece that carries
Point blank to this place boy, and batters; Hostess,
I kiss thy hands through which many a round reckoning
And things of moment have had motion.
Still mind old Brother.
Set thy Seller open,
For I must enter, and advance my colours
I have brought the Dons indeed wench, Dons with ducats,
And those Dons must have dainty wine, pure Bacchus
That bleeds the life blood: what is your cure ended?
We shall have meat man.
Then we shallhave wine man,
And wine upon wine, cut and drawn with wine.
Ye shall have all, and more then all.
All, well then.
Away, about your business, you with her
For old acquaintance sake, to stay your stomach 
And Boy, be you my guide ad inferos,
For I will make a full descent in equipage.
Isle show you rare wine.
Stinging gear.
Divine Sir.
O divine boy, march, march my child, rare wine boy.
As in Spain Sir.
Old, and strong too,
O my fine Boy, clear too?
As crystal Sir, and strong as truth.
Away boy,
I am enamoured, and I long for Diligence,
Stay no where child, not for thy fathers blessing,
I charge thee not to save thy sisters honour,
Nor to close thy dams eyes were she a dying,
Till we arrive; and for thy recompense
I will remember thee in my Will.
Ye have said Sir. 
MINE Host, is that apparel got ye spoke of?
Ye shall have ready money.
It is come in Sir, he has it on Sir,
And I think it will be fit, and of my credit
It was never worn but once Sir, and for necessity
Pound to the man I told ye of.
Pray bargain for it,
And I will be the pay-master.
I will Sir.
And let our meat be ready when you please,
I mean as soon.
It shall be presently.
How far stands Barcelona?
But two leagues off Sir,
You may be there by three a clock.
I am glad on it. 
Signior Francisco why I draw you hither
To this remote place, marvel not, for trust me
My innocence yet never knew ill dealing,
And as ye have a noble temper, start not
Into offence, at any thing my knowledge,
And for your special good, would be informed of,
Nor think me vainly curious.
Worthy Sir,
The courtesies you and your noble Brother
Even then when few men find the way to do 'em,
I mean in want, so freely showrd upon me,
So truly and so timely ministered,
Must if I should suspect those minds that made 'em,
Either proclaim me an unworthy taker,
Or worse, a base believer; Speak your mind Sir
Freely, and what you please, I am your Servant.
Then my young Sir, know since our first acquaintance
Induced by circumstances that deceive not
To clear some doubts I have; nay blush not Signior,
I have beheld ye narrowly; more blushes!
Sir, ye give me so much light, I find ye
A thing confessed already; yet more blushes?
You would ill cover an offence might sink ye
That cannot hide your self; why do ye shake so?
I mean no trouble to ye; this fair hand
Was never made for hardness, nor those eyes.
Come do not hide 'em, for rough objects, hark ye,
Ye have betrayed your self, that sigh confirms me;
An other? and a third to? then I see
These Boys clothes do but pinch ye, come be liberal,
Ye have found a friend that has found you, disguise not
That laden soul that labours to be open:
Now you must weep, I know it, for I see
Your eyes down laden to the lids, another
Manifest token that my doubts are perfect;
Yet I have found a greater; till me this
Why were these holes left open, there was an error,
A foul one my Francisco, have I caught ye?
O pretty Sir, the custom of our Country
Allows men none in this place: Now the shower comes.
O Signior Theodoro.
This sorrow shows so sweetly
I cannot choose but keep it company:
Take truce and speak Sir: and I charge your goodness
by all those perfect hopes that point at virtue
By that remembrance these fair tears are shed for,
If any sad mis-fortune have thus formed ye,
That either care or counsel may redeem,
Pain, purse, or any thing within the power
And honour of free Gentlemen, reveal it,
And have our labours.
I have found ye noble
And ye shall find me true; your doubts are certain,
Nor dare I more dissemble; I am a woman,
The great example of a wretched woman;
Here you must give me leave to show my Sex;
And now to make ye know how much your credit
Has won upon my soul, so it please your patience,
Isle tell you my unfortunate sad story.
Sit down and say on Lady.
I am born Sir
Of good and honest parents, rich, and noble,
And not to lye, the daughter of Don Zanchio,
If my unhappy fortune have not lost me:
My name called Leocadia, even the same
Your worthy brother did the special honour
To name for beautiful; and without pride
I have been often made believe so Signior;
But thats impertinent: Now to my sorrows;
Not far from us a Gentleman of worth,
A neighbor and a noble visitor,
Had his abode; who often met my Father
In gentle sports of chase, and river hawking,
In course and riding, and with him often brought
A Son of his, a young and hopeful Gentleman,
Nobly trained up, in years fit for affection,
A sprighly man, of understanding excellent,
Of speech, and civil 'havior, no less powerful;
And of all parts, else my eyes lied, abundant:
We grew acquainted, and from that acquaintance
Nearer into affection; from affection
Into belief.
Well.
Then we durst kiss.
Go forward.
But O man, man, inconstant, careless man,
O subtle man, how many are thy mischiefs?
O Marck-antonio, I may curse those kisses.
What did you call him Lady?
Mark-antonio,
The name to me of misery.
Pray foreword.
From these we bred desires Sir: but lose me heaven
If mine were lustful.
I believe.
This nearness
Made him importunate: When to save mine honour
Love having full possession of my powers,
I got a contract from him.
Sealed?
And sworn too:
Which since for some offence heaven laid upon me
I lost among my moneys in the robbery,
The loss that makes me poorest: this won from him
Fool that I was, and too too credulous,
I pointed him a by-way to my chamber
The next night at an hour.
Pray stay there Lady:
And when the night came, came he, kept he touch with ye?
Be not so shamefaced: had he both your wishes?
Tell me, and tell me true, did he enjoy ye,
Were ye in one another arms, abed? the Contract
Confirmed in full joys there? did he lie with ye?
Answer to that; ha? did your father know this,
The good old man, or kindred privy to it?
And had ye their consents? did that nights promise
Make ye a Mother?
Why do you ask so nearly?
Good Sir, do's it concern you any thing?
No Lady,
Only the pity why you should be used so,
A little stirs me, but did he keep his promise?
No, no Signior,
Alas he never came nor never meant it,
My love was fooled, time numbered to no end,
My expectation slouted, and guess you Sir,
What dor unto a doting Maid this was,
What a base breaking off.
Ell's well then Lady;
Go forward in your Story.
Not only failed Sir
Which is a curse in love, and may he find it
When his affections are full winged, and ready
To stoop upon the quarry, then when all
His full hopes are in's arms: not only thus Sir
But more injurious, faithless, treacherous,
Within two days fame gave him far removed
With a new love, which much against my conscience
But more against my cause, which is my hell
I must confess a fair one, a right fair one,
Indeed of admirable sweetness, Daughter
Unto another of our noble neighbours
The thief called Theodosia; whose perfections
I am bound to ban for ever, curse to wrinkles,
As heaven I hope will make 'em soon; and aches,
For they have robed me poor unhappy wench
Of all, of all Sir, all that was my glory
And left me nothing but these tears, and travel:
Upon this certain news, I quit my Father
And if you be not milder in construction
I fear mine honour too; and like a Page
Stole to Ossuna: from that place to Civil,
From thence to Barcelona I was travelling
When you overtook my misery, in hope to hear of
Galleys bound up for Italy; for never
Will I leave off the search of this bad man
This filcher of affections, this love Peddler,
Nor shall my curses cease to blast her beauties
And make her name as wandering as her nature
Till standing face to face before their lusts
I call heavens justice down.
This shows too angry
Nor can it be her fault she is beloved,
If I give meat, must they that eat it surfeit?
She loves again Sir, there's the mischief of it
And in despite of me to drown my blessings
Which she shall dearly know.
Ye are too violent.
She has Devils in her eyes, to whose devotion
He offers all his service.
Who can say
But she may be forsaken too? he that once wanders
From such a perfect sweetness, as you promise
Has he not still the same rule to deceive?
No, no they are together, love together
Past all deceit of that side; sleep together,
Live, and delight together, and such deceit
Give me in a wild desert.
By your leave Lady
I see no honour in this cunning.
Honour?
True, none of her part, honour, she deserves none,
It is ceased with wandering Ladies such as she is,
So bold and impudent.
I could be angry
Extremely angry now beyond my nature
And it were not for my pity: what a man
is this to do these wrongs: believe me Lady
I know the maid, and know she is not with him.
I would you knew she were in heaven.
And so well know her
That l think you are consent.
So I say Sir.
I mean in her behaviour
For trust my faith so much I dare adventure for her credit
She never yet delighted to do wrong:
How can she then delight in him; dare she think
Be what she will, as excellent as Angels
My love so fond, my wishes so indulgent
That I must take her prewnings; stoop at that
She has tired upon: No Sir, I hold my beauty
Wash but these sorrows from it; of a sparkle
As right and rich as hers, my means as equal,
My youth as much unblown: and for our words
And weight of virtue.
Do not task her so far.
By heaven she is cork, and clouds, light, light sir, vapor
But I shall find her out, with all her witchcrafts,
Her paintings, and her powncings: for it is art
And only art preserves her, and mere spells
That work upon his powers: let her but show me
A ruined cheek like mine, that holds his colour
And writes but sixteen years in spite of sorrows
An unbathed body, smiles, that give but shadows
And wrinkle not the face: besides she is little
A demi dame that, that makes no object.
Nay,
Then I must say you err: for credit me
I think she is taller then your self.
Why let her
It is not that shall mate me: I but ask
My hands may reach unto her.
Gentle Lady
It is now ill time of further argument,
For I perceive your anger void of council,
Which I could wish more temperate.
Pray forgive me
If I have spoken uncivilly: they that look on
See more than we that play: and I beseech ye
Impute it loves offence, not mine; whose torments,
If you have ever loved, and found my crosses
You must confess are seldom tied to patience,
Yet I could wish I had said less.
No harm then;
Ye have made a full amends; our Company
You may command, so please you in your travels
With all our faith and furtherance; let it be so.
Ye make too great an offer.
Then it shall be
Go in and rest your self, our wholesome diet
Will be made ready straight: But hark ye Lady
One thing I must entreat, your leave, and sufferance
That these things may be open to my Brother
For more respect and honour.
Do your pleasure.
And do not change this habit by no means
Unless ye change your self.
Which must not yet be.
It carries ye concealed and safe.
I am counselled. 
What's done?
Why all we doubted; it is a woman,
And of a noble strain too, guess.
I cannot.
You have heard often of her.
Stay I think not.
Indeed ye have; it is the fair Leocadia
Daughter unto Don Zanchio, our noble neighbor.
Nay?
It is she Sir of my credit.
Leocadia,
Pish Leocadia, it must not be.
It must be, or be nothing.
Pray give me leave to wonder, Leocadia?
The very same.
The damsel Leocadia
I guest it was a woman, and a fair one
I see it through her shape, transparent plain
But that it should be she; tell me directly.
By heavens it is she.
By heaven then it is a sweet one.
That's granted too.
But hark ye, hark ye Sister,
How came she this disguised?
Isle tell you that too
As I came on the self-same ground, so used too.
By the same man?
The same too.
As I live
You lovers have fine fancies,
Wondrous fine ones.
Pray heaven you never make one.
Faith I know not,
But in that mind I am, I had rather cobble,
It is a more Christian trade: pray tell me one thing
Are not you two now monstrous jealous
Of one another?
She is much of me
And has railed at me most unmercifully
And to my face, and of my conscience
Had she but known me, either she or I
Or both, had parted with strange faces
She was in such a fury.
Leocadia?
Do's she speak handsomely?
Wondrous well Sir
And all she do's becomes her, even her anger.
How seemed she when you found her?
Had you seen
How sweetly fearful her pretty self
Betrayed her self, how neat her sorrow showed,
And in what hansom phrase she put her story,
And as occasion stirred her how she started
Though roughly, yet most aptly into anger
You would have wondered.
Do's she know ye?
No.
Nor must not by no means.
How stands your difference?
Isle tell ye that some fitter time, but trust me
My Marck-antonio has too much to answer.
May I take knowledge of her?
Yes she is willing.
Pray use her as she is, with all respects then,
For she is a woman of a noble breeding.
Ye shall not find me wanting.
Which way bears she?
Our way, and to our end.
I am glad on it; hark ye,
She keeps her shape? 
Yes, and I think by this time
Has mewed her old.
She is here: by heaven a rare one,
An admirable sweet one, what an eye
Of what a full command she bears, how gracious
All her aspect shows; bless me from a feavor
I am not well of the sudden.
Noble friends
Your meat and all my service waits upon ye.
Ye teach us manners Lady; all which service
Must now be mine to you, and all to poor too;
Blush not, we know ye; for by all our faiths
With us your honour is in sanctuary
And ever shall be.
I do well believe it,
Will ye walk nearer Sir. 
She shows still fairer,
Younger in every change, and clearer, neater;
I know not, I may fool my self, and finely
Nourish a wolf to eat my heart out; Certain
As she appears now, she appears a wonder,
A thing amazes me; what would she do then
In women's helps, in ornaments apt for her
And deckings to her delicacy? without all doubt
She would be held a miracle; nor can I think
He has forsaken her: Say what she please,
I know his curious eye, or say he had,
Put case he could be so boy-blind and foolish,
Yet still I fear she keeps the Contract with her
Not stolen as she affirms, nor lost by negligence,
She would loose her self first, it is her life, and there
All my hopes are dispatched; O noble love
That thou could be without this jealousy,
Without this passion of the heart, how heavenly
Would thou appear upon us? Come what may come
Isle see the end on it: and since chance has cast her
Naked into my refuge, all I can
She freely shall command, except the man. 
Don Pedro, do you think assuredly
The Galleys will come round to Barcelona
Within these two days?
Without doubt.
And think ye
He will be with 'em certainly?
He is sir
I saw him at their setting off.
Must they needs
Touch there for water as you say?
They must sir
And for fresh meat too: few or none go by it
Beside so great a Fleet must needs want trimming
If they have met with foul seas, no harbour
On this side, Spain, is able without danger
To moore 'em, but that haven.
Are the wars
His only end?
So he professes.
Bears he
Any command amongst 'em?
Good regard
With all; which quickly will prefer him.
Pray Sir tell me,
And as you are a gentleman be liberal.
I will Sir, and most true.
Who saw ye with him?
None but things like himself; young soldiers
And gentlemen desirous to seek honour.
Was there no woman there, nor, none disguised
That might be thought a woman in his language?
Did he not let slip something of suspicion
Touching that wanton way.
Believe me Sir
I neither saw, nor could suspect that face
That might be doubted women's, yet I am sure
Aboard him I see all that past, and it is impossible
Among so many high set bloods there should be
A woman, let her close her self within a cockle,
But they would open her, he must not love
Within that place alone, and therefore surely
He would not be so foolish, had he any,
To trust her there; for his discourse, it was ever
About his business, war, or mirth to make us
Relish a Can of wine well; when he spoke private
'T was only the remembrance of his service,
And hope of your good prayers for his health Sir,
And so I gave him to the seas.
I thank ye,
And now am satisfied, and to prevent
Suspicions that may nourish dangers Signior,
For I have told you how the mad Alphenso
Chafes like a Stag in the toil, and bends his fury
Against all, but his own ignorance; I am determined
For peace sake and the preservation
Of my yet untouched honour, and his cure
My self to seek him there, and bring him back
As testimony of an unsought injury
By either of our actions; That the world
And he if he have reason, may see plainly
Opinion is no perfect guide; nor all fems
Founders of truths: In the mean time this curtsy
I must entreat of you Sir, Be my self here
And as my self command my family.
Ye lay too much trust on me.
It is my love Sir,
I will not be long from ye; if this question
Chance to be called upon ere my return
I leave your care to answer; So farewell Sir.
Ye take a wise way; All my best endeavours
Shall labour in your absence; peace go with ye. 
A noble honest gentleman, free hearted
And of an open faith, much loving, and much loved,
And father of that goodness only malice
Can truly stir against; what dare befall
Till his return Isle answer. 
Walk off Sirha
But keep your self within my call?
I will Sir.
And stir my horse for taking cold: within there,
Hoe people; you that dwell there, my brave Signior
What are ye all a sleep? is it that time with ye?
Isle ring a little louder.
Sir who seek ye?
Not you Sir; Whore's your Master?
I serve no man
In way of pay sir.
Whore's the man of the house then?
What would you have with him Sir?
Do you stand here Sir
To ask men questions when they come?
I would sir
Being his friend, and hearing such alarms
Know how men come to visit him.
Ye shall sir,
Pray tell his mightiness here is a gentleman
By name Alphonso, would entreat his conference
About affairs of state sir, are ye answered?
I must be sir.
Stay, set me down, stay Signior,
You must stay, and ye shall stay.
Meaning me sir?
Yes you Sir, you I mean, I mean you.
Well Sir,
Why should I stay?
There's reason.
Reason Sir?
I reason sir
My wrong is greatest, and I will be served first,
Call out the man of fame?
How served sir?
Thus sir.
But not before me.
Before all the world sir
As my case stands.
I have lost a daughter sir.
I have lost another worth five score of her sir.
Ye must not tel me so.
I have, and hark ye?
Make it up five score more: Call out the fellow,
And stand you by sir.
This is the mad morris.
And I stand by?
I say stand by, and do it.
Stand by among thy lungs.
Turn presently
And say thy prayers, thou art dead.
I scorn thee
And scorn to say my prayers more then thou do???st,
Mine is the most wrong, and my daughter dearest
And mine shall first be righted.
Shall be righted.
A third may live I see, pray hear me gentlemen.
Shall be.
I, shall be righted.
Now?
Now.
Instantly.
Before I stir.
Before me.
Before any.
Dost thou consider what thou say? hast thou friends here
Able to quench my anger, or persuade me
After I have beaten thee into one main bruised
And made thee spend thy state in rotten apples,
Thou can at length be quiet, shall I kill thee
Divide thee like a rotten Pumpion,
And leave thee stinking to posterity,
Ther's not the least blow I shall give; but do's this
Urge me no further: I am first.
Isle hang first.
No goodman glory, it is not your bravado's,
Your punctual honour, nor soldadoship.
Set me a little nearer.
Let him sally.
Lined with your quircks of carriage and discretion
Can blow me off my purpose. Wher's your credit
With all your school points now? your decent arguing
And apt time for performing: where are these toys,
These wise ways, and most honourable courses,
To take revenge? how dare thou talk of killing,
Or think of drawing any thing but squirts
When lechery has dry founderd thee?
Nearer yet,
That I may spit him down: thou look like a man.
I would be thought so Sir.
Prithee do but take me,
And fling me upon that Puppy.
Do for heavens sake,
And see but how isle hug him.
Yet take warning.
Faith gentlemen, this is a needless quarrel.
And do you desire to make one?
As a friend Sir,
To tell you all this anger is but lost Sir,
For Leonardo is from home.
No, no Sir.
Indeed he is.
Where dare he be, but here Sir,
When men are wronged, and come for satisfactions.
It seems he has done none Sir, for his business
Clear of those cares, hath carried him for sometime
To Barcelona; if he had been guilfy,
I know he would have staid, and cleared all difference
Either by free confession, or his sword.
This must not be.
Sure, as I live, it is Sir.
Sure, as we all live,
He's run away for ever: Barcelona,
Why? it is the key for Italy, from whence
He stole first hither.
And having found his knaveries
Too gross to be forgiven, and too open,
He has found the same way back again: I believe too
The good grass gentleman, for his own ease,
Has taken one oth'Pillyes: Is not his stuff sold.
I fear his worships shoos too; to escape us,
I do not think he has a dish within doors,
A louse left of his linnage.
Ye are too wide Sir.
Or one poor wooden spoon,
Come in and see Sir.
Isle see his house on fire first.
Then be pleased Sir
To give better censure.
I will after him,
And search him like concealed land; but isle have him,
And though I find him in his shrift, isle kill him.
Isle bear ye company.
Pray have a care then,
A most especial care, indeed a fear,
Ye do not anger me.
I will observe ye,
And if I light upon him handsomely.
Kill but a piece of him, leave some Alphonso
For your poor friends.
I fear him not for all this.
Shall we first go home,
For it may prove a voyage, and dispose
Of things there; heaven knows what may follow.
No,
Isle kill him in this shirt I have on: let things
Govern themselves, I am master of my honour
At this time, and no more; let wife, and land,
Lie lay till I return.
I say amen to it:
But what care for our monies?
I will not spend
Above three shillings, till his head be here,
Four is too great a sum for all his fortunes.
Come take me up instantly.
Farewell to you Sir,
And if your friend be in a featherbed,
Sowed up to shroud his fears, tell him it is folly,
For no course but his voluntary hanging
Can get our pardons. 
These I think would be
Offence enough, if their own indiscretions
Would suffer 'em: two of the old seditions,
When they want enemies, they are their own foes:
Were they a little wiser, I should doubt 'em:
Till when isle ne'er break sleep, nor suffer hunger
For any harm he shall receive: For it is as easy
If he be guilty, to turn these two old men
Upon their own throats, and look on, and live still.
As it is to tell five pound: a great deal sooner,
And so isle to my meat, and then to hawking. 
Sir, this is complement; I pray you leave me.
Sir, is it not?
Why? I would only see the Town.
And only that I come to show you.
Which I can see without you.
So you may
Plainly, not safely: For such difference
As you have seen betwixt the sea and earth
When waves rise high, and land would beat 'em back
As fearful of Invasion; such we find
When we land here at Barcelona.
Sir.
Besides our General of the Galleys, fearing
Your hasty nature, charged me not return
Without you safe.
O Sir, that Rodorigo
Is noble, and he do's mistake my temper.
There is not in the world, a mind less apt
To conceive wrongs, or do 'em; he's he seen me
In all this voyage, in the which he pleases
To call me friend, let slip a hasty word?
'S'light Sir: yonder is a Lady veiled,
For propernesse, beyond comparison,
And sure her face is like the rest: we will see it.
Why? you are hasty Sir already: know you
What it is you go about.
Yes, I would see
The women's face.
By heaven you shall not do it: 
You do not know the custom of the place:
To draw that curtain here, though she were mean,
Is mortal.
Is it? earth must come to earth
At last, and by my troth, isle ity it Sir.
Then I must hold you fast. By all the faith
That can be placed in man, it is an attempt
More dangerous then death: it is death and shame:
I know the Lady well.
Is she a Lady?
I shall the more desire to see her Sir.
She is Alanso's wife, the Governor,
A noble gentleman.
Then let me go,
If I can win her, you and I will govern
This Town Sir, fear it not, and we will alter
These barbarous customs then; for every Lady
Shall be seen daily, and seen over too.
Come, do not jest, nor let your passions bear you
To such wild enterprises: hold you still,
For as I have a soul, you shall not do it.
She is a Lady of unblemishd'd fame, 
And here to offer that affront, were base:
Hold on your way, and we will see the Town,
And overlook the Ladies.
I am schooled,
And promise you I will: But good Sir, see,
She will pass by us now; I hope I may
Salute her thus far off.
'S foot, are you mad?
Twill be as ill as the other.
What's the matter?
What would that fellow have?
Good Sir forbear,
It seems you are new landed: would you beg
Any thing here?
Yes Sir, all happiness
To that fair Lady, as I hope.
Marckantonio.
Her face, which needs no hiding: I would beg
A sight of.
Now go on, for it is too late
To keep this from a tumult.
Sirrah, you
Shall see a fitter object for your eyes,
Then a fair Ladies face.
For heavens sake, raise not
A quarrel in the streets for me.
Slip in then;
This is your door.
Will you needs quarrel then?
We must, or suffer
This outrage: is it not all your minds sirs, speak?
Yes.
Then I do beseech ye, let my Lord
Not think the quarrel about me; for it is not. 
See, happily some of our Galley Soldiers
Are come a shore.
Come on Sir, you shall see
Faces enough.
Some one of you call to
Our General, the whole roar of the Town
Comes in upon us.
I have seen Sir bettet
Perhaps, then that was covered; and will yet
See that, or spoil yours. 
On: why start you back?
Alas Sir, they are fighting.
Let's begone,
See, see, a handsome man struck down.
Ho General,
Look out, Antonio is iti distress.
Antonio?
Antonio! it is he.
Ho, Governor make a shot into the Town,
Isle part you: bring away Antonio 
Into my Cabin. 
I will do that office.
I fear It is the last, that I shall do him.
The last, why will he die?
Since I have found him: happiness leave me,
When I leave him. 
Why Theodosia?
My Sister; wake: alas, I grieved but now
To see the streels so full; and now I grieve
To see 'em lest so empty I could wish,
Tumult himself were here, that yet at least
Amongst the band, I might espy some face
So pale and fearful, that would willingly
Embrace an arrand for a Cordial,
Or Aquavitae, or a cup of sack,
Or a Physician. But to talk of these
She breaths: stand up, O Theodosia,
Speak but as thou were wont, give but a sigh,
Which is but the most unhappy piece of life,
And I will ever after worship and build
Apply my self to grief; prepare and build
Altars to sorrow.
O Philippo, help me.
I do; these are my arms; Philippo's arms,
Thy Brothers arms that hola thee up.
You help me
To life: but I would see Antonio
That's dead.
Thou shalt see any thing; how dost thou?
Better, I thank you.
Why that's well: call up
Thy senses, and uncloud thy covered spirits.
How now?
Recovered: but Antonio,
Where is he?
We will find him: art thou well?
Perfectly well, saving the miss of him;
And I do charge you here, by our alliance,
And by the love which would have been betwixt us,
Knew we no kindred; by that killing fear,
Mingled with twenty thousand hopes and doubts,
Which you may think, placed in a Lovers heart,
And in a Virgins too, when she wants help,
To grant me your assistance, to find out
This man alive, or dead; and I will pay you
In service, tears, or prayers, a world of wealth:
But other treasure, I have none: alas!
You men have strong hearts; but we feeble maids
Have tender eyes, which only given be
Yo blind themselves, crying for what they see.
Why dost thou charge me thus? have I been found
Slow to perform, what I could but imagine
Thy wishes were; have I at any time
Tendered a business of mine own, beyond
A vanity of thine? have I not been
As if I were a senseless creature, made
To serve thee without power of questioning,
If so, why fear thou?
I am satisfied.
Come, then let's go; wher's Leocadia?
I know not Sir.
Wher's Leocadia?
I do not know.
Leocadia,
This Tumult made the streets as dead as night,
A man may talk as freely: what's become
Of Leocadia?
She's run away.
Begone, and let us never more behold
Each others face, till we may both together
Fasten our eyes on her: accursed be
Those tender cozening names of charity,
And natural affection, they have lost
Me only by observing them, what cost
Travel, and fruitless wishes may in vain
Search through the world, but never find again.
Good Sir be patient, I have done no fault
Worthy this banishment.
Yes, Leocadia,
The Lady so distressed, who was content
To lay her story, and to lay her heart
As open as her story to your self,
Who was content, that I should know her Sex,
Before dissembled, and to put her self
Into my conduct, when I undertook
Safely to guard, is in this Tumult lost.
And can I help it Sir?
No, would thou could,
You might have done, but for that scale religion
You woman bear to swownings, you do pick
Your times to faint, when some body is by:
Bound or by nature, or by love, or service
To raise you from that well dissembled death:
Inform me but of one that has been found
Dead in her private chamber by her self,
Where sickness would no more forbear, then here,
And I will quit the rest for her.
I know not
What they may do, and how they may dissemble;
But by my troth, I did not.
By my troth,
Would I had tried; would I had let thee lain,
And followed her.
I would you had done so
Rather, then been so angry: wher's Antonio?
Why dost thou vex me with these questions?
Isle tell thee where, he's carried to the Galleys,
There to be chained, and row, and beat, and row
With knotted ropes, and pizzels; if he swooned,
He has a dotes of biscuit.
I am glad
He is alive.
Was ever man thus troubled,
Tell me where Leocadia is?
Good brother be not so hasty, and I think I can:
You found no error in me, when I first???
Told you she was a woman, and believe me
Sometning I have found out, which makes me think,
Nay, almost know so well, that I durst swear
She followed hurt Antonio.
What do we
Then lingering here; we will aboard the Galleys
And find her.
Made he a shot into the Town?
He did Sir.
Call back those Gentlemen.
The Governor, commands you back.
We will obey him Sir.
You gave him cause so shoot, I know; he is
So far from rash offence, and holds with me
Such curious friendship: could not one of you
Have called me while it was doing, such an uproar,
Before my door too?
By my troth Sir, we were so busy in the public cause, of our own
Private falling out, that we forgot it; at home we see now
You were not, but as soon as the shot made us fly, we ran
Away as fast as we could to seek your honour.
It was gravely done; but no man tells the cause
Or chance, or what it was that made you differ.
For my part Sir, if there were any that I knew
Of, the shot drove it out of my head: do you know any neighbours.
Not we, not we.
Not well nor can you tell.
No other cause,
But the old quarrel betwixt the Town and the Galleys.
Come nearer Gentlemen: what are your names?
My name Philippo.
And mine Theodoro.
Strangers you are it seems.
Newly arrived.
Then you are they begun this Tumult.
No Sir.
Speak one of you.
They are not, I can quiet 'em.
Yet we saw part, and an unhappy part
Of this debate, a long sought friend of ours
Struck down for dead, and borne unto the Galleys,
His name is Markantonio.
And another
Of our own company, a Gentleman
Of noble birth, besides accompanied
With all the gifts of nature, ravished hence?
We know not how, in this dissention.
Get you home all, and work; and when I hear
You meddle with a weapon any more
But those belonging to your Trades, isle lay you
Where your best Customers shall hardly find you.
I am sorry gentlemen, I troubled you,
Being both strangers; by your tgngues, and looks,
Of worth: To make ye some part of amends
If there be any thing in this poor Town
Of Barcelona that you would command,
Command me.
Sir, this wounded Gentleman,
If it might please you, if your power and love
Extend so far, I would be glad to wish
Might be removed into the Town for cure:
The Galleys stay not, and his wound I know
Cannot endure a voyage.
Sir, he shall,
I warrant you; Go call me hither Sirrah,
One of my other Servants. 
And besides.
The gentleman we lost, Signior Francisco,
Shall he be rendered too.
And he Sir too: Go sirrah, bear this ring
To Rodorigo, my most noble friend,
The General of the Gallys: Tell him this. 
Now we shall have 'em both.
Blessed be thy thoughts
For apprehending this: blessed be thy breath
For uttering it.
Come gentlemen, you shall
Enter my roof: and I will send for Surgeons,
And you shall see your friends here presently.
His name was Markantonio.
I know it,
And have sent word so.
Did you not forget
Francisco's name?
Nor his: you'ar truly welcome,
To talk about it more, were but to say
The same word often over: you are welcome. 
This is the house Sir.
Enter it, I pray you,
For I am faint, although I think my wound
Be nothing. Soldiers, leave us now: I thank you.
Heaven send you health Sir.
Let me lead you in.
My wounds not in my feet; I shall entreat 'em
I hope to bear me so far. 
How seriously these land men fled, when our General made a
Shot, as if he had been a warning to cal 'em to their Hall.
I cannot blame 'em: What a man have they now in the
Town, able to maintain a Tumult, or uphold a matter out
Of square if need be: O the quiet hurly burleys that I
Have seen in this Town, when we have fought four hours
Together, and not a man amongst us so impertinent or
Modest to ask why? but now the pillars that bare
Up this blessed Town in that regular debate, and
Scambling, are dead, the more's the pity.
Old Ignatio lives still.
Yes, I know him: he will do prettily well at a mans liver:
But where is there a man now living in the Town
That hath a steady hand, and understands Anatomy
Well? if it come to a particular matter of the lungs,
Or the spleen, why? alas Ignatio is to seek; are
There any such men left as I have known, that
Would say they would hit you in this place? is there
Ever a good heartist, or a member parser, or a
Small-gut man left in the Town, answer
Me that.
Mass, I think there be not.
No, I Warrant thee. Come, come, it is time
We were at the Gallys. 
Sir, you may know by what I said already,
You may command my house; but I must beg
Pardon to leave you, if the public business
Forced me not from you, I my self should call it
Unmannerly: but good Sir, do you give it
A milder name: it shall not be an hour
Ere I return.
Sir, I was ne'er so poor
In my own thoughts, as that I want a means
To require this with.
Sir, within this hour. 
This the Lady that I quarrelled for:
O lust, if wounds cannot restrain thy power,
Let shame: nor do I feel my hurt at all,
Nor is it ought, only I was well beaten:
If I pursue it, all the civil world
That ever did imagine the content
Found in the band of man and wife unbroke,
The reverence due to households, or the blemish
That may be stuck upon posterity
Will catch me, bind me, burn upon my forehead,
This is the wounded stranger, that received
For charity into a house, attempted:
I will not do it.
Sir, how do you now?
That you walk off.
Worse Madam, then I was;
But it will over.
Sit, and rest a while.
Where are the Surgeons?
Sir, it is their manner,
When they have seen the wound especially,
The patient being of worth, to go consult,
Which they are now at in another room,
About the dressing.
Madam, I do feel
My self not well.
Alas!
How do you Sir.
Will you drink waters?
No good Madam, it is not
So violent upon me; nor I think
Any thing dangerous: But yet there are
Some things that sit so heavy on my conscience
That will perplex my mind, and stop my cure,
So that unless I utter 'em. A scratch
Here on my thumb will kill me: Gentlemen,
I pray you leave the room, and come not in
Your selves, or any other till I have
Opened my self to this most honoured Lady.
We will not.
O blessed! he will discover now
His love to me.
Now he will tell the Lady
Our Contract. 
I do believe he will confess to me
The wrong he did a Lady in the streets;
But I forgive him.
Madam, I perceive
My self grow worse and worse.
Shall I call back your friends?
O no; but ere I do impart
What burdens me so sore, let me entreat you,
(For there is no trust in these Surgeons)
To look upon my wound; it is perhaps
My last request: But tell me truly too,
That must be in: how far you do imagine
Ir will have power upon me.
Sir, I will.
For heavens sake, softly: oh, I must needs lay
My head down easily, whilst you do it.
Do Sir,
It is but an ordinary blow; a child
Of mine has had a greater, and been well;
Are you faint hearted?
Oh.
Why do you sigh?
There is no danger in the world in this;
I wonder it should make a man sit down;
What do you mean, why do you kiss my breasts?
Lift up your head, your wound, may well endure it.
O Madam, may I not express affection,
Dying-affection too I fear, to those
That do me favours, such as this of yours.
If you mean so, it is well; but what's the business
Lies on your conscience?
I will tell you Madam.
Tel me, and laugh?
But I will tel you true
Though I do laugh, I know as well as you
My wound is nothing, nnor the power of earth
Could lay a wound upon me, in your presence,
That I could feel; But I do laugh to think
How covertly, how far beyond the reach
Of men, and wisemen too, we shall deceive 'em,
Whilst they imagine I am talking here
With that short breath I have, ready to swooned
At every full point; you my ghostly Mother
To hear my sad confession, you and I
Will on that bed within, prepared for me,
Debate the matter privately.
Forbear,
Thou were but now as welcome to this house
As certain cures to sick men, and just now
This sudden alteration makes thee look
Like plagues come to infect it; if thou knew
How loathsome thou wilt be, thou would entreat
These walls, or posts to help thee to a hurt,
Past thy dissimulation.
Gentle Madam
Cal 'em not in?
I will not ye, this place
I know to be within the reach of tongue,
And ears, thou can not force me; therefore hear me
What I will tell thee quickly, thou art born
To end some way more disesteemed then this,
Or which is worse, to dye of this hurt yet,
Come gentleman.
Good Modem.
Gentlemen.
Madam how is it? is Mark-antonio well?
Methinks your looks are altered, and I see
A strange distemper in you.
I am wrought
By that dissembling man, that fellow worth
Nothing but kicking.
Gentle Madam speak
To me alone, let not them understand
His fault, he will repent it I dare swear.
Isle tell it you in private.
Mark-antonio,
How do you?
Stand further off I pray you
Give me some ayre.
Good Brother, will he scope,
The Surgeons say there is no danger.
Scope?
No doubt he will.
Alas will he not leave
This trying all; Madam, I do beseech you
Let me but speak to him, you and these by,
And I dare almost promise you to make him
Show himself truly sorrowful to you, besides a story I shall open to you,
Not put in so good words but in it self
So full of chance, that you will easily
Forgive my tediousness, and be well pleased
With that so much afflicts me.
Good Sir do.
And I desire no interruption
Of speech may trouble me, till I have said
What I will quickly do.
What will she say?
Come gentlemen, I pray you lend your ears,
And keep your voices.
Signior Mark-antonio
How do you?
Oh the Surgeons.
Let me tel you
Who know as well as you, you do dissemble,
It is no time to do so; leave the thoughts
Of this vain world, forget your flesh and blood,
And make your spirit an untroubled way
To pass to what it ought.
You're not in earnest?
Why I can walk Sir, and am well.
It is true
That you can walk, and do believe you're well:
It is the nature, as your Surgeons say
Of these wounds, for a man to go, and talk,
Nay merrily, till his last hour, his minute:
For heaven sake sir, sit down again.
Alas
Where are the Surgeons?
Sir, they will not come,
If they should dress you, you would dye they say
Ere one told twenty; trouble not your mind,
Keep your head warm, and do not stir you body,
And you may live an hour.
Oh heavens, an hour?
Alas, it is to little to remember
But half the wrongs that I have done; how short
Then for contrition, and how least of all
For satisfaction?
But you desire
To satisfy.
Heaven knows I do.
Then know
That I am he, or she, or what you will
Most wronged by you; your Leocadia,
I know you must remember me.
Oh heaven!
That lost her friends, that lost her fathers house,
That lost her fame, in loosing of her Sex,
With these strange garments, there is no excuse
To hinder me, it is within your power
To give me satisfaction; you have time
Left in this little piece of life to do it:
Therefore I charge you for your conscience sake,
And for our fame, which I would fain have live
When both of us are dead; to celebrate
That Contract; which you have both sealed and sworn
Yet ere you dye, which must be hastily
Heaven knows.
Alas, the sting of conscience
To death-ward for our faults: draw nearer all
And hear what I unhappy man shall say;
First Madam I desire your pardon; next
(I fell my spirits fail me) Gentlemen
Let me shake hands with you, and let's be friends,
For I have done wrong upon wrong so thick
I know not where, that every man methinks
should be mine enemy; Forgive me both.
Lastly it is true (oh I do feel the power
Of death seize on me) that I was contracted
By seal and oath to Leocadia;
(I must speak fast, because I fear my life
Will else be shorter then my speech would be)
But it is impossible to satisfy
You Leocadia, but by repentance,
Though I can dyingly, and boldly say
I know not your dishonour, yet that was
Your virtue, and not mine, you know it well;
But herein lies the impossibility,
O Theodosia, Theodosia
I was betrothed to Theodosia
Before I ever saw thee; heaven forgive me
She is my wife this half hour whilst I live.
That's I, that's I, I 'me Theodosia,
Hear me a little now, who have not suffered
Disgrace at all methinks, since you confess
What I so long have sought for, here is with me
Philippo too, my Brother.
I am glad;
All happiness to him; Come let me kiss thee
Beg pardon of that Maid for my offence,
And let me further, with a dying breath
Tell in thine ear, the rest of my desires.
I am afraid they will all four turn women
If we hold longer talk.
Alas there is
No hope for me; that's Theodosia
And that her Brother, I am only sorry
I was beholding to 'em; I will search
Over the world, as careless of my fortunes,
As they of me, till I can meet a curse
To make these almost-killing sorrows worse. 
Sir, as I live she lied, only to draw
A just confession from you, which she hath
A happy one for me, ask of this Lady,
Ask of my Brother.
Sir, she did dissemble,
Your wound is nothing.
Leocadia's gone. 
Rise up, and stir your self, it is but amazement
And your imagination that afflicts you,
Look you Sir now.
I think it is so indeed.
The Surgeons do not come, because they swear
It needs no dressing.
You shall talk with 'em
Within, for your own fancy.
Whore's your Brother And Leocadia?
Within Belike.
I feel my self methinks as well as ever.
Keep then your mind so too; I do forgive
The fault you did to me; But here is one
Must not be wronged hereafter.
Neither shall she
When I make jests of oaths again, or make
My lust play with religion, when I leave
To keep true joys for her, and yet within
My self true sorrow for my passed deeds
May I want grace, when I would fain repent,
And find a great and sudden punishment. 
WHere is mine Host, did not he see him neither?
Not I, y faith Sir.
Nor the muleteer?
Nay he is past seeing, unless it be in's sleep,
By this time; all his visions were the pots,
Three hours since Sir.
Which way should she take?
Nay, look you now; do you all stand still? good god
You might have lighted on him, now, this instant?
For loves sake seek him out, who ever find him
I will reward his fortune as his diligence;
Get all the Town to help, that will behir'd,
Their pains isle turn to an anal holiday,
If it shall chance, but one bring word of her,
Pray you about it.
Her sir? who do you mean?
(I had forgot my self) the Page I meant
That came along with us.
He you give the clothes too?
I ga' the clothes to; Rascal.
Nay good Sir.
Why dost thou mention, or upbraid my courtesies Slave?
For your honour Sir.
Wretch; I was honoured,
That she would wear 'em (he, I would say) 's death?
Go, get, and find him out, or never see me,
I shall betray my love ere I possess it,
Some star direct me, or ill planet strike me. 
Best to divide.
Isle this way.
And I this.
I, as you, find him for a real.
It is done.
My course is now directly to some piehouse
I know the Pages compass.
I think rather
The smock side of the Town, the surer harbour
At his years to put in.
If I do find
The hungry haunt, I take him by the teeth now.
I by the tail, yet I as you.
No more. 
Dear Leocadia, where can thou be fled
Thus like a spirit hence? and in a moment?
What cloud can hide thee from my following search
If yet thou art a body? sure she hath not
Tan any house? she did too late leave one
Where all humanity of a place received her,
And would (if she had stayed) have helped to right
The wrong her fortune did her; yet she must
Be interred somewhere, or be found, no street,
Lane, passage, corner, turn, hath escaped enquiry:
If her despair had ravished her to ayre
She could not yet be rarefied so 
But some of us should meet her? though their eyes
Perhaps be leaden, and might turn; mine would
Strike out a lightning for her, and divide
A mist as thick as ever darksnesse was,
Nay see her through a quarry; they do lye,
Lye grossly that say love is blind: by him,
And heaven they lye; he has a sight can pierce
Through Ivory as clear as it were horn,
And reach his object.
Sir hoe's found, hoe's found.
Ha? where? But reach that happy note again
And let it relish truth, thou art an Angel.
Hoe's here; fast by sir, calling for a Boat
To go aboard the Galleys.
Where, where; hold thee. 
He might have kept this now, I had nought to show for 't
If he had had the wit to have gone from 's word,
These direct men, they are no men of fashion,
Talk what you will, this is a very smelt. 
Upon your art Sir, and your faith to assist it
Shall I believe you then hiS wounds not mortal?
Sir it is not worth your question; less your fear.
You do restore me Sir, I pray you accept
This small remembrance of a fathers thanks
For so assured a benefit.
Excuse me.
Sir I can spare it, and must not believe
But that your fortune may receive 't, except
You 'ld have me think you live not by your practise.
I crave your pardon Sir; you teach me manners.
I crave your love and friendship, and require
As I have made now, both my self and business
A portion of your care, you will but bring me
Under the person of a called assistant
To his next opening, where I may but see him,
And utter a few words to him in private,
And you will merit me; For I am loath
Since here I have not to appear my self,
Or to be known unto the Governor,
Or make a tumult of my purpose.
Neither
I hope will be your need Sir; I shall bring you
Both there, and off again without the hazard. 
Will you not hear me?
I have heard so much
Will keep me deaf for ever; No, Mark-antonie
After thy sentence, I may hear no more,
Thou hast pronounced me dead.
Appeal to reason,
She will reprieve you from the power of grief,
Which rules but in her absence; Hear me say
A sovereign message from her, which in duty,
And love to your own safety, you ought hear:
Why do you strive so? whither would you fly?
You cannot wrest your self away from care
You may from council; you may shift your place
But not your person; and another Climb
Makes you no other.
Oh.
For passions sake,
(Which I do serve, honour, and love in you)
If you will sigh, sigh here; If you would vary
A sigh to tears, or out-cry, do it here.
No shade, no desert, darkness, nor the grave
Shall be more equal to your thoughts then I,
Only but hear me speak.
What would you say?
That which shall raise your heart, or pull down mine,
Quiet your passion, or provoke mine own;
We must have both one balsam, or one wound,
For know (loved fair) since the first providence
Made me your rescew, I have read you through,
And with a wondering pity, looked on you,
I have observed the method of your blood,
And waited on it even with sympathy
Of a like red, and paleness in mine own;
I knew which blush was angers, which was loves,
Which was the eye of sorrow, which of truth;
And could distinguish honour from disdain
In every change; And you are worth my study:
I saw your voluntary misery
Sustained in travel: A disguised Maid
Wearied with seeking: and with finding lost,
Neglected, where you hoped most; or put by;
I saw it, and have laid it to my heart,
And though it were my Sister, which was righted,
Yet being by your wrong, I put off nature,
Could not be glad, where I was bound to triumph,
My care for you, so drowned respect of her,
Nor did I only apprehend your bonds,
But studied your release: and for that day
Have I made up a ransom, brought you health
Preservative against chance, or injury
Please you apply it to the grief; my self.
Humh.
Nay do not think me less then such a cure,
Antonio was not; And it is possible
Philippo may succeed: My blood and house
Are as deep rooted: and as fairly spread,
As Mark-antonio's, and in that, all seek,
Fortune hath given him no precedence:
As for our thanks to Nature I may burn
Incense as much as he: I ever durst
Walk with Antonio oy the self-same light
At any feast, or triumph, and nev'r cared
Which side my Lady or her woman took
In their survey; I durst have told my tale too
Though his discourse new ended.
My repulse.
Let not that torture you, which makes me happy
Nor think that conscience (fair) which is no shame
It was no repulse, I was your dowry rather:
For then methought a thousand graces met
To make you lovely, and ten thousand stories
Of constant virtue, which you then out-reach'd,
In one example, did proclaim you rich
Nor do I think you wretched, or disgraced
After this suffering, and do therefore take
Advantage of your need; but rather know
You are the charge and business of those powers,
Who, like best Tutors, do inflict hard tasks
Upon great Natures, and of noblest hopes;
Read trivial lessons, and half lines to sluggs;
They that live long and never feel mischance,
Spend more then half their age in ignorance.
It is well you think so.
You shall think so too,
You shall sweet Leocadia, and do so.
Good Sir no more; you have too fair a shape
To play so foul a part in, as the Tempter:
Say that I could make peace with fortune, who,
Who should absolve me of my vow yet; ha?
My Contract made?
Your Contract?
Yes, my Contract,
Am I not his? his wife?
Sweet, nothing less.
I have no name then?
Truly then you have not;
How can you be his wife, who was before
Another husband?
Oh, though he dispense
With his faith given, I cannot with mine.
You do mistake (clear soul) his pre-contract
Doth annul yours, and you have given no faith
That ties you in religion, or humanity,
You rather sin against that greater precept,
To covet what's another; Sweet, you do
Believe me, who dare not urge dishonest things,
Remove that scruple therefore, and but take
Your dangers now, into your judgements scale
And weigh them with your safeties: Think but whither
Now you can go: what you can do to live?
How near you have barred all Ports to your own succour,
Except this one that I here open: Love
Should you be left alone, you were a prey
To the wild lust of any, who would look
Upon this shape like a temptation
And think you want the man you personate
Would not regard this shift, which love put on
As virtue forced but covet it like vice;
So should you live the slander of each Sex,
And be the child of error, and of shame,
And which is worse, even Mark-antonie
Would be called just, to turn a wanderer off,
And Fame report you worthy his contempt;
Where if you make new choice, and setle here
There is no further tumult in this flood.
Each currant keeps his course, and all suspicions
Shall return honours: Came you forth a Maid?
Go home a Wife? alone? and in disguise?
Go home a waited Leocadia:
Go home, and by the virtue of that Charm
Transform all mischiefs, as you are transformed;
Turn your offended Fathers wrath to wonder,
And all his loud grief to a silent welcome:
Unfold the Riddles you have made, what say you?
Now is the time; delay is but despair,
If you be changed, let a kiss tell me so.
I am: but how, I rather feel then know.
Come Sir; you are welcome now to Barcelona,
Take off my hood.
Who be these? stay, let's view 'em?
It was a long journey: are you not weary Sir?
Weary? I could have rid it in mine Armour.
Alas!
What ayl you deer?
It is my Father.
Your Father: which?
He that is carried: oh
Let us make hence.
For loves sake: good my heart.
Into some house before he see me.
Deer,
Be not thus frighted.
O his wrath is tempest.
Sweet, take your spirit to you, and stay be it he,
He cannot know you in this habit, and me
I'm sure he less knows, for he never saw me.
Ha? who is that? my Son Philippo?
Sir.
Why, what make you here? Is this Salamanca?
And that your study? ha? nay stay him too,
We'll see him by his leave.
You must not strive Sir.
No, no, come near.
My daughter: Leocadia?
How Sir: your daughter?
Yes Sir, and as sure
As that's your Son: Come hither: what now? run
Out of your sex? breached? was it not enough
At once to leave thy Father, and thine honour,
Unless the had quit thy self too.
Sir what fault
She can be urged off, I must take on me
The guilt, and punishment.
You must Sir: how
If you shall not, though you must? I deal not
With boys Sir; I, you have a Father here
Shall do me right.
Thou art not mad Philippo?
Art thou Mark-antonie? Son to Leonardo?
Our business is to them.
No, no, no, no,
Isle have the business now: with you, none else,
Pray you let's speak, in private: (carry me to him)
Your Son's the ravisher Sir, and here I find him:
I hope you'll give me cause to think you noble,
And do me right, with your sword sir, as becomes
One gentleman of honour to another;
All this is fair Sir: here's the sea fast by,
Upon the sands, we will determine
It is that I call you too; let's make no days on it,
Isle lead your way; to the seaside Rascals.
Sir
I would beseech your stay; he may not follow you.
No, turn isle kill him here then: Slaves, Rogues, Blocks
Why do you not bear me to him? have you been
Acquainted with my motions, loggs, so long
And yet not know to time 'em.
Were you Sir
Not impotent.
Hold you your peace Boy.
Impotent
'Death isle cut his throat first, and then his Fathers.
You must provide you then a sharper razor
Then is your tongue, for I not fear your sword.
'Heart bear me to either of 'em.
Pray Sir your patience.
My curse light on thee if thou stay him.
Hold.
Why, what's the matter, Gentlemen, what tumult
Is this you raise in the street? before my door?
Know you what it is to draw a weapon here.
Yes, and to use it (bear me up to him, Rogues)
Thus, at a Traitors heart.
Truer then thine.
Strike, strike; Some of the people disarm 'em,
Kill 'em if they resist.
Nay generous sir
Let not your curtsy turn fury now.
Lay hold upon 'em, take away their weapons,
I will be worth an answer, ere we part.
Tic the Governor sir.
I yield my self.
My Sword? what think thou of me? pray thee tell me.
As of a Gentleman.
No more.
Of worth,
And quality.
And I should quit my Sword
There were small worth or quality in that friend;
Pray thee learn thou more worth and quality
Then to demand it.
Force it I say.
The Governor
You hear, commands.
The Governor shall pardon me.
How, Leocadia gone again? 
He shall friend
In the point of honour; by his leave, so tell him,
His person and authority I acknowledge,
And do submit me to it; but my Sword,
He shall excuse me, were he fifteen Governors;
That and I dwell together, and must yet
Till my hands part, assure him.
I say force it.
Stay, hear me. Hast thou ever read Curanza?
Understandst thou honour, Noble Governor?
For that we will have more fit dispute.
Your name sir.
You shall know that too: But on colder terms,
Your blood and brain are now too hot to take it.
Force my Sword from me? this is an affront.
Bring 'em away.
You'll do me reparation. 
I have for ever lost her, and am lost,
And worthily: my tameness hath undone me;
She's gone hence, ashamed of me: yet I seek her.
Will she be ever found to me again,
Whom she saw stand so poorly, and dare nothing
In her defence, here, when I should have drawn
This Sword out like a meteor, and have shot it
In both our parents eyes, and left 'em blind
Unto their impotent angers? O I am worthy
On whom this loss and scorn should light to death
Without the pity that should wish me better,
Either alive, or in my Epitaph.
Well son, your father is too near himself
And hath too much of nature to put off
Any affection that belongs to you.
I could have only wished you had acquainted
Her father, whom it equally concerns,
Though you'd presumed on me: it might have opened
An easier gate, and path to both our joys:
For though I am none of those flinty Fathers
That when their children do but natural things,
Turn rock and offence straight: yet Marc-antonio,
All are not of my quarry.
Tic my fear sir;
And if hereafter I should ere abuse
So great a piety, it were my malice.
We must entreat you Gentlemen to take
Another room, the Governor is coming
Here, on some business.
We will give him way.
I will have right sir on you; that believe,
If there be any Marshals Court in Spain.
For that sir we shall talk.
??? doe not slight me,
Though I am without a Sword.
Keep to your chair sir.
???Let me fall, and hurl my chair! (slaves) at him.
You are the more tempered man sir: let me entreat
Of you the manner how this brawl fell out.
Fell out? I know not how: nor do I care much:
But here we came sir to this Town together,
Both in one business and one wrong, engaged
To seek one Leonardo an old Genoese,
I have said enough there; would you more? false father
Of a false son, called Marc-antonio,
Who had stole both our daughters; and which father
Conspiring with his son in treachery,
It seemed, to fly our satisfaction,
Was, as we heard, come private to this Town
Here to take ship for Italy.
You heard
More then was true then: by the fear, or falsehood,
And though I thought not to reveal my self
(Pardon my manners in it to you) for some
Important reasons; yet being thus character'd
And challenged, know I dare appear, and doe
To who dares threaten.
I say he is not worthy
The name of man, or any honest preface,
That dares report or credit such a slander.
Doe you sir say it?
Sir, I doe say it.
Hold,
Is this your father Signior Marc-antonio?
You have ill requited me thus to conceal him
From him would honour him, and do him service.
It was not his fault sir.
Whore's my Lord.
Sweet heart.
Know you these Gentlemen? they are all the fathers
Unto our friends.
So it appears my Dove.
Sir I say nothing: I doe want a Sword,
And till I have a Sword I will say nothing.
Good sir command these Gentlemen their Arms;
Entreat 'em as your friends, not as your prisoners.
Where be their Swords?
Restore each man his weapon.
It seems thou hast not read Curanza, fellow
I must have reparation of honour,
As well as this; I find that wounded.
Sir,
I did not know your quality, if I had
Tic like I should have done you more respects.
It is sufficient, by Caranza's rule.
I know it is sir.
Have you read Caranza Lady?
If you mean him that writ upon the duel,
He was my kinsman.
Lady, then you know
By the right noble writings of your kinsman,
My honour is as dear to me, as the Kings.
Tic very true sir.
Therefore I must crave
Leave to go on now with my first dependence.
What ha you more?
None here good Signior.
I will, refer me to Claranza still.
Nay love, I prithee let me manage this.
With whom is it sir?
With that false man Alphonso.
Why he has th'advantage sir in legs.
But I
In truth, and hand and heart, and a good Sword.
But how if he will not stand you Sir.
For that,
Make it no question Lady, I will stick
My feet in earth down by him, where he dare.
O would thou would.
Isle do it.
Let me kiss him.
I fear thou wilt not yet.
Why Gentlemen,
If you'll proceed according to Curanza,
Me thinks an easier way, were too good chairs,
So you would be content sir to be bound,
Because he is lame, isle fit you with like weapons,
Pistols and Poniards, and even end it. If
The difference between you be so mortal.
It cannot be tan up.
Tan up? take off
This head first.
Come bind me in a chair.
Yes, do.
What mean you, Dove.
Let me alone,
And set 'em at their distance: when you have done
Lend me two Poniards; isle have Pistols ready
Quickly. 
She is not here Marc-antonio.
Saw you not Leocadia?
Not I brother.
Brother let's speak with you; you were false unto her.
I was, but have asked pardon: why do you urge it?
You were not worthy of her.
May be I was not;
But tic not well, you tell me so.
My sister
Is not so fair.
It skils not.
Nor so virtuous.
Yes, she must be as virtuous.
I would fine???
What brother?
Srike you.
I shall not bear strokes
Though I do these strange words.
Will you not kill me?
For what good brother?
Why, for speaking well
Of Leocadia.
No indeed.
Nor ill
Of Theodosia?
Neither.
Fare you well then.
Nay you shall have as Noble seconds too
As ever duellists had; give 'em their weapons:
Now St Iago.
Are they charged?
Charged sir,
I warrant you.
Would they were well discharged.
I like a Sword much better I confess.
Nay wherefore stay you? shall I mend your mark?
Strike one another, thorough these?
My love.
My Theodosia.
I have not the heart.
Nor I.
Why here is a dependence ended.
Unbind that Gentleman; come take here to you
Your sons and daughters, and be friends. A feast
Waits you within, is better then your fray:
Lovers, take you your own, and all forbear
Under my roof, either to blush or fear
My love, what say you; could Cuzanza himself
Carry a business better?
It is well:
All are content I hope, and we well eased,
If they for whom we have done all this be pleased.
TO this place Gentlemen, full many a day
We have bid ye welcome; and to many a Play:
And those whose angry souls were not diseasd
With law, or lending money, we have pleased;
And make no doubt to do again. This night
No mighty matter, nor no light,
We must entreat you look for: A good tale
Told in two hours, we will not fail
If we be perfect to rehearse ye: New
I am sure it is, and handsome; but how true
Let them dispute that writ it, Ten to one
We please the women; and I would know that man
Follows not their example. If ye mean
To know the Play well, travel with the Scene.
For it lies upon the road; if we chance tire,
As ye are good men leave us not in the mire,
Another bait may mend us: If you grow
A little gald or weary; cry but hoe,
And we will stay for ye. When our journey ends
Every mans Pot I hope, and all part friends.

