STay light-foot Iris, for thou striv'st in vain,
My wings are nimbler then thy feet.
Away,
Dissembling Mercury, my messages
Ask honest haste; not like those wanton ones
Your thundering father sends.
Stay foolish maid,
Or I will take my rise upon a hill,
When I perceive thee seated in a cloud
In all the painted glory that thou hast,
And never cease to clap my willing wing,
Till I catch hold on thy discoloured Bow,
And shiver it beyond the angry power
Of your mad mistress to make up again.
Harms forbear, Juno will chide and strike;
Is great Jove jealous that I am employed
On her love errands? she did never yet
Clasp weak mortality in her white arms,
As he has often done; I only come
To celebrate the lone wished Nuptials
Here in Olympia, which are now perform'
Betwixt two goodly Rivers that have mixed
Their gentle winding waves, and are to grow
Into a thousand streams great as themselves.
I need not name them, for the sound is loud
In Heaven and earth, and I am sent from her
The Queen of marriage, that was present here,
And smiled to see them join, and hath not chid
Since it was done. Gooo Harms let me go.
Nay you must stay; Joves message is the same
Whose eyes are lightning, and whose voice is thunder,
Whose breath is aerie wind, he will, who knows
How to be first in Earth as well as Heaven.
But what hath he to doe with Nuptial rites?
Let him sit pleased upon his Starry throne,
And fright poor mortals with his Thunder-bolts,
Leaving to us the mutual darts of eyes.
Alas, when ever offered he to abridge
Your Ladies power, but only now, in these,
Whose match concerns the general government?
Hath not each God a part in these high joys?
And shall not he the King of Gods presume
Without proud Juno's licence? let her know
That when enamourd Jove first gave her power
To link soft hearts in undesolving bands,
He then foresaw, and to himself reserved
The honour of this marriage; thou shalt stand
Still as a Rock, while I to bless this Feast
Will summon up with mine all-charming rod
The Nymphs of Fountains, from whose watery locks,
(Hung with the dew of blessing and increase)
The greedy Rivers take their nourishment.
Yea Nymphs who bathing in your loved Springs,
Beheld these Rivers in their infancy,
And joyed to see them when their circled heads
Refreshed the ayre, and spread the ground with Flowers:
Rise from your Wells, and with your nimble feet
Perform that Office to this happy pair,
Which in these plains you to Alpheus did,
When passing hence, through many Seas unmixed,
He gained the favour of his Arethuse.
The Nymphs rise and dance a little, and then make a stand.
Is Harms grown a Lover? by what power
Unknown to us calls he the maids?
Presumptuous Iris, I could make thee dance
Till thou forgetst thy Ladies messages,
And rinsed back crying to her; thou shalt know
My power is more, only my breath, and this
Shall move fixed Stars, and force the Firmament
To yield the Hyades, who govern showers,
And dewy clouds, in whose dispersed drops
Thou formst the shape of thy deceitful Bow.
Yea maids who yearly at appointed times
Advance with kindly tears, the gentle floods
Descend, and pour your blessing on these streams,
Which rolling down from Heaven-aspiring hills,
And now united in the fruitful veils,
Bear all before them, ravished with their joy,
And swell in glory till they know no bounds.
Great wit and power hath Harms to contrive
A lively dance, which of one sex consists.
Alas poor Iris, Venus hath in store
A secret ambush of her winged boys,
Who lurking long within these pleasant groves
First stuck these lovers with their equal darts,
Those Cupids shall come forth and join with these,
To honour that which they themselves began.
Behold the Statues which wise Vulcan placed
Under the Altar of Olympian Jove,
And gave to them an artificial life:
See how they move, drawn by this heavenly joy,
Like the wild Trees which followed Orpheus Harp.
And what will Juno's Iris doe for her?
Just match this show, or mine inventions fail,
Had it been worthier, I would have invoked
The blazing Comets, Clouds and falling Stars,
And all my kindred meteors of the ayre,
To have exceld it; but I now must strive
To imitate confusion; Therefore thou
Delightful Flora, if thou ever feltst
Increase of sweetness in those blooming Plants,
On which the horns of my fair Bow decline,
Send hither all that rural company,
Which deck the Maygames with their clownish sports;
Juno will have it so.
Iris, we strive
Like winds at liberty, who should doe worst
Ere we return. If Juno be the Queen
Of marriages, let her give happy way
To what is done in honour of the State
She governs.
Harms, so it may be done
Merely in honour of the State, and those
That now have proved it; not to satisfy
The lust of Jupiter, in having thanks
More then his Juno, if thy Snaky rod
Have power to search the Heaven, or sound the Sea,
Or call together all the ends of earth,
To bring thee any thing that may doe grace
To us, amd these, do it, we shall be pleased.
Then know that from the mouth of Jove him???self,
Whose words have wings, and need not to be borne,
I took a message, and I bore it through
A thousand yielding clouds, and never staid
Till his high will was done: The Olympian games
Which long had slept, at these wished nuptials,
He pleased to have renewed, and all his Knights
Are gathered hither, who within their Tents
Rest on this hill, upon whose rising head
Behold Joves Altar, and his blessed Priests
Moving about it; come you holy men,
And with your voices draw these youths along,
That till Joves Music call them to their games,
Their active sports may give a blessed content
To those for whom they are again begun.
Shake off your heavy trance,
and leap into a dance,
Such as no mortals use to tread,
fit only for Apollo
To play to, for the Moon to lead,
And all the Stars to follow.
On blessed youths, for Jove doth pause,
Laying aside his graver Laws
For this device:
And at the wedding such a pair,
Each dance is taken for a prayer,
Each Song a Sacrifice.
More pleasing were these sweet delights,
If Ladies moved as well as Knights;
Run every one of you and catch
A Nymph, in honour of this match;
And whisper boldly in her ear,
Jove will but laugh if you forswear.
And this days sins he doth resolve,
That we his Priests should all absolve.
You should stay longer if we durst
Away, alas that he that first
Gave time wild wings to fly away,
He's now no power to make him stay.
And though these games must needs be plaid,
I would these pair when they are laid,
And not a creature nigh 'em,
Might catch his sith as he doth pass,
And clip his wings, and break his glass,
And keep him ever by 'em.
Peace and silence be the guide
To the man, and to the Bride:
If there be a joy yet new
In marriage, let it fall on you,
That all the World may wonder:
If we should stay, we should do worse,
And turn our blessings to a curse,
By keeping you asunder.

