WHat happiness waits on the life at Court,
What dear content, greatness, delight &amp; ease?
What ever-springing hopes, what tides of honour,
That raise their fortunes to the height of wishes?
What can be more in man, what more in nature,
Then to be great and feared? A Courtier,
A noble Courtier, It is a name that draws
Wonder, and duty, from all eyes and knees.
And so your Worships land within the walls,
Where you shall have it all enclosed and sure.
Peace knave; dull creature, bred of sweat and smoke,
These mysteries are far above thy faith:
But thou shalt see—
And then I shall believe;
Your fair revenues, turned into fair suites,
I shall believe your Tenants bruised and rent
Under the weight of Coaches, all your state
Drawn through the streets in triumph, suits for places
Plied with a mine of gold, and being got
Fed with a great stream, I shall believe all this.
You shall believe, and know me glorious.
Cozin good day and health. 
The same to you Sir,
And more, without my wishes, could you know
What calm content dwells in a private house:
Yet look into your self, retire: this place
Of promises, and protestations, fits
Minds only bent to ruin, you should know this,
You have their language perfect, you have tutors
I doe not doubt sufficient: but beware.
You are merry Couzin:
Yet your patience,
You shall learn that too, but not like it self
Where it is held a virtue; tell me Sir,
Have you cast up your state, rated your land,
And find it able to endure the change
Of time and fashion? is it always harvest?
Always vintage? have you ships at Sea
To bring you gold, and stone from rich Peru
Monthly returning treasure? doth the King
Open his large Exchequer to your hands
And bid you be a great man? can your wife
Coin off her beauty? or the week allow
Suites to each day? and know no ebb in honour?
If these be possible, and can hold out,
Then be a Courtier still, and still be wasting,
Cozen, pray give me leave:
I have done.
I could requite your gall, and in a strain
As bitter, and as full of Rubarb, preached
Against your Country life, but it is below me
And only subject to my pity, know
The eminent court, to them that can be wise,
And fasten on her blessings, is a sun
That draws men up from course and earthly being,
I mean these men of merit that have power
And reason to make good her benefits,
Learns them a manly boldness, gives their tongues
Sweetness of language, makes them apt to please;
Files of all rudeness, and uncivil haviour,
Shows them as neat in carriage as in clothes;
Cozen have you ever seen the Court?
No Sir,
Nor am I yet in travail with that longing.
O the state, and greatness of that place
Where men are found
Only to give the first creation glory!
Those are the models of the ancient world
Left like the Roman statues to stir up
Our following hopes, the place it self puts on
The brow of Majesty, and flings her lustre
Like the air newly lightened, form, and order,
Are only there themselves, unforc't, and sound,
As they were first created to this place.
You nobly came, but will go from thence base.
It was very pretty, and a good conceit;
You have a wit good Cozen, I do joy in it,
Keep it for Court: but to my self again,
When I have viewed these pieces, turned these eyes,
And with some taste of superstition,
Looked on the wealth of Nature, the fair dames,
Beauties, that lights the Court, and makes it show
Like a fair heaven, in a frosty night:
And amongst these mine, not poorest, it is for tongues
Of blessed Poets, such as Orpheus was,
To give their worth and praises; O dear Cozen:
You have a wife, and fair, bring her hither,
Let her not live to be the Mistress of a Farmers heir
And be confined ever to a serge,
Far courser then my horse-cloath.
Let her have Velvets, Tiffinies, Jewels, Pearls,
A Coach, an Usher, and her two Lackeys,
And I will send my Wife to give her rules,
And read the rudiments of Court to her.
Sir I had rather send her to Virginia
To help to propagate the English nation. 
Sir, how slept your Mistress, and what visitants
Are to pay service?
Sir as I came out,
Two Counts were newly entered.
This is greatness,
But few such servants waite a Country beauty.
They are the more to thank their modesty,
God keep my wife, and all my Issue female
From such uprisings. 
What? my learned Doctor?
You will be welcome, give her health and youth
And I will give you gold. 
Cozen, how savours this? is it not sweet?
And very great, tastes it not of Nobleness?
Faith Sir my palate is too dull and lazy
I cannot taste it, it is not for my relish,
But be so still.
Since your own misery must first reclaim ye,
To which I leave you Sir,
If you will yet be happy, leave the humour
And base subjection to your Wife, be wise,
And let her know with speed you are her husband,
I shall be glad to hear it.
My horse is sent for. 
Even such another country thing as this
Was I, such a piece of dirt, so heavy,
So provident to heap up ignorance,
And be an ass: such musty clothes wore I,
So old and threed-bare: I do yet remember
Divers young Gallants lighting at my gate,
To see my honoured wife, have offered pence,
And bid me walk their horses, such a slave
Was I in show then: but my eyes are opened.
Many sweet morrows to my worthy Wife.
It is well, and aptly given, as much for you,
But to my present business, which is money—
Lady I have none left.
I hope you dare not say so, nor imagine so base and lowe,
A thought: I have none left.
Are these words fitting for a man of worth,
And one of your full credit? Do you know
The place you live in? me, and what I labour
For, you? and your advancement?
Yes my dearest.
And do you pop me off with this slight answer,
In troth I have none left? in troth you must have;
Nay stare not, it is most true, send speedily
To all that love you, let your people fly
Like thunder through the City,
And not return under five thousand crowns.
Try all, take all, let not a wealthy merchant be untempted
Or any that hath the name of money,
Take up at any use, give band, or land,
Or mighty statutes able by their strength
To tie up Simpson were he now alive,
There must be money gotten; for be persuaded,
If we fall now, or be but seen to shrink,
Under our fair beginnings, it is our ruin,
And then good-night to all, (but our disgrace)
Farewell the hope of coming happiness,
And all the aims we levied at so long.
Are ye not moved at this? no sense of want,
Towards your self yet breeding? be old,
And common; jaded to the eyes
Of grooms, and pages, chamber-maides, and garders,
And when you have done, put your poor house in order
And hang your self, for such must be the end
Of him that willingly forsakes his hopes
And hath a joy to tumble to his ruin.
All that I say is certain, if ye fail
Do not impute me with it, I am clear.
Now heaven forbid I should do wrong to you
My dearest Wife, and Madam; yet give leave
To your poor creature to unfold himself.
You know my debts are many more then means,
My bands not taken in, my friends at home
Drawn dry with these expenses, my poor Tenants
More full of want then we, then what new course
Can I beget to raise those crowns by? speak,
And I shall execute.
Pray tell me true,
Have you not land in the Country?
Pardon me, I had forgot it.
Sir, you must remember it,
There is no remedy, this land must be
In Paris ere to morrow night.
It shall, let me consider, some 300. acres
Will serve the turn.
Twill furnish at all points,
Now you speak like your self, and know like him,
That means to be man, suspect no less
For the return will give ye five for one,
You shall be great to morrow, I have said it.
Farewell, and see this business be afoot
With expedition. 
Health, all joy, and honour
Waite on my lovely wife. What? Jaques, Iaques.
Sir did you call?
I did so, hie the Iaques.
Down to the Bank, and there to some good Merchant
(Conceive me well good Iaques, and be private)
Offer 300. acres of my land:
Say it is choice, and fertile, ask upon it
Five thousand Crowns, this is the business
I must employ thee in, be wise and speedy.
Sir do not do this.
Knave I must have money.
If you have money thus, your knave must tell ye
You will not have a foot of land left, be more wary
And more friend to your self, this honest land
Your Worship has discarded, has been true,
And done you loyal service.
Gentle Iaques,
You have a merry wit, employ it well
About the business you have now in hand.
When ye come back, enquire me in the presence,
If not, in the Tennis-Court, or at my house. 
If this vain hold, I know where to enquire ye.
Five thousand crowns, this with good husbandry
May hold a month out, then 5000. more,
And more land a bleeding for it, as many more
And more land laid aside. God and St. Dennis
Keep honest minded young men Bachelors.
It is strange My Mr. should be yet so young
A puppy, that he cannot see his fall
And got so near the sun. I'll to his Cozen
And once more tell him on it, if he fail,
Then to my mortgage, next unto my sale. 
Gentlemen, hold on discourse a while,
I shall return with knowledge how, and where
We shall have best access unto my Mistress
To Tender your devotions. 
Be it so:
Now to our first discourse.
I prithee peace;
Thou can not be so bad, or make me know
Such things are living, doe not give thy self
So common and so idle, so open vile,
So great a wronger of thy worth, so low,
I cannot, nor I must not credit thee.
Now by this light I am a Whore-master,
An open and an excellent Whore-master,
And take a special glory that I am so:
I thank my stars I am a Whore-master,
And such a one as dare be known and seen,
And pointed at to be a noble wencher.
Do not let all ears hear this, hark ye Sir,
I am my self a Whore-master, I am
Believe it Sir (In private be it spoken)
I love a VVhore directly, most men are Wenchers,
And have professed the science, few men
That looks upon ye now, but Whore-masters,
Or have a full desire to be so.
This is noble.
It is without all question, being private,
And held as needful as intelligence,
But being once discovered, blown abroad,
And known to common senses, it is no more
Then geometrical rules in Carpenters
That only know some measure of an art,
But are not grounded: be no more deceived,
I have a conscience to reclaim you, Sir.
Mistake me not: I do not bid you leave your whore
Or less to love her; forbid it
I should be such a villain to my friend,
Or so unnatural: it was never harboured here,
Learn to be secret first, then strike your Dear.
Your fair instructions Monsieur I shall learn.
And you shall have them: I desire your care.
They are your servants.
You must not love.
How Sir?
I mean a Lady, theres danger
She hath an Usher and a Waiting-Gentlewoman,
A page, a Coach-man, these are feed, and feed
And yet for all that will be prating.
So.
You understand me Sir, they will discover't,
And there is a loss of credit: table talk
Will be the end of this, or worse, then that;
Will this be worthy of a Gentleman?
Proceed good Sir.
Next leave your City Dame;
The best of that tribe are most merely coy,
Or most extremely foolish, both which vices
Are no great stirrers up, unless in husbands
That owe this Cattle, fearing her thats coy
To be but seeming, her that's fool too forward.
This is the rarest fellow, and the soundest
I mean in knowledge, that ere wore a Codpiece,
He has found out that will pass all Italy,
All France and England, to their shames I speak
And to the griefs of all their Gentlemen
The noble theory of luxury.
Your patience,
And I will lay before your eyes a course
That I my self found out, it is excellent,
Easy, and full of freedom.
O good Sir,
You rack me till I know it.
This it is,
When your desire is up, your blood well heated
And apt for sweet encounter, choose the night
And with the night your wench the streets have store,
There seize upon her, get her to your chamber,
Give her a cardecew, it is royal payment
When ye are dull, dismiss her, no man knows
Nor she her self, who hath encountered her.
O but their faces.
Ne'er talk of faces:
The night allows her equal with a Duchess,
Imagination doth all think her fair,
And great, clapped in velvet, she is so
Sir, I have tried those, and do find it certain
It never fails me, it is but twelve nights since
My last experience.
O my meiching varlet, I'll fit ye as I live.
It is excellent, I'll be your Scholar Sir.
You are fairly welcome both: troth Gentlemen
You have been strangers, I could chide you for it,
And task ye with unkindness, what's the news?
The town was never empty of some novelty;
Servant, what's your intelligence?
Faith nothing.
I have not heard of any worth relating
Nor I sweet Lady.
Then give me attention,
Monsieur Shattillion's mad.
Mad?
Mad as May-butter,
And which is more, mad for a wench.
It is strange, and full of pity.
All that comes near him
He thinks are come of purpose to betray him,
Being full of strange conceit: the wench he loved
Stood very near the Crown.
Alas good Monsieur;
A' was a proper man, and fair demeaned,
A person worthy of a better temper.
He is strong opinioned that the wench he loved
Remains close prisoner by the Kings command:
Fearing her title, when the poor grieved Gentlewoman
Follows him much lamenting, and much loving
In hope to make him well, he knows her not,
Nor any else that comes to visit him.
Let's walk in Gentlemen, and there discourse
His further miseries, you shall stay dinner,
In truth you must obey.
We are your servants. 
Ther's no good to be done, no cure to be wrought
Upon my desperate kinsman: I'll to horse
And leave him to the fools whip, misery.
I shall recover twenty miles this night,
My horse stands ready, I'll away with speed.
Sir, may I crave your name?
Yes Sir you may:
My name is Cleremon.
It is well, your faction?
What party knit you with?
I know no parties,
Nor no factions Sir.
Then wear this cross of white:
And where you see the like they are my friends,
Observe them well, the time is dangerous.
Sir keep your cross, I'll wear none, sure this fellow
Is much beside himself, grown mad.
A word Sir;
You can pick nothing out of this, this cross
Is nothing but a cross, a very cross,
Plain without spell or witch-craft, search it,
You may suspect, and well, there's poison in it,
Powder, or wild-fire, but it is nothing so.
I do believe you Sir, it is a plain cross.
Then do your worst, I care not, tell the King,
Let him know all this, as I am sure he shall;
When you have spit your venom, then will I
Stand up a faithful, and a loyal subject,
And so God save His Grace, this is no Treason.
He is March mad, farewell Monsieur.
Farewell;
I shall be here attending, it is my life
They aim at, there's no way to save it, well
Let 'em spread all their nets: they shall not draw me
Into any open Treason, I can see,
And can beware, I have my wits about me,
I thank heaven for it.
There he goes,
That was the fairest hope the French Court bred,
The worthiest and the sweetest tempered spirit,
The truest, and the valiantest, the best of judgment,
Till most unhappy I: severed those virtues
And turned his wit wild with a coy denial,
Which heaven forgive me, and be pleased, O heaven
To give again his senses: that my love
May strike off all my follies.
Lady.
I Sis
Your will with me sweet Lady.
Sir I come.
From the dread sovereign King, I know it Lady,
He is a gracious Prince, long may he live,
Pertain you to his chamber?
No indeed Sir,
That place is not for women, do you know me?
Yes, I do know you.
Whats my name? pray you speak.
Thats all one, I do know you and your business,
You are discovered Lady, I am wary,
It stands upon my life; pray excuse me,
The best man of this kingdom sent you hither,
To dive into me, have I touched you? ha?
You are deceived Sir, I come from your love,
That sends you fair commends, and many kisses.
Alas poor soul how does she? is she living?
Keeps she her bed still?
Still Sir, She is living,
And well, and shall do so.
Are ye in counsel?
No Sir, nor any of my sex.
Why so,
If you had been in counsel, you would know,
Her time to be but slender; she must die.
I do believe it Sir.
And suddenly,
She stands too near a fortune.
Sir?
It is so,
There is no jesting with a Princes title,
Would we had both been borne of common parents
And lived a private and retired life,
In homely cottage, we had then enjoyed,
Our loves, and our embraces, these are things,
That cannot tend to treason—
I am wretched.
O I pray as often for the King as any,
And with as true a hart, for's continuance,
And do moreover pray his heirs may live;
And their fair issues, then as I am bound
For all the states and commons, if these prayers
Be any ways ambitious, I submit,
And lay my head down let 'em take it off;
You may inform against me, but withal
Remember my obedience to the crown,
And service to the state.
Good Sir, I love ye.
Then love the gracious King, and say with me
Heaven save his grace.
This is strange—
A woman should be sent to undermine me,
And buzz love into me to try my spirit;
Offer me kisses and enticing follies,
To make me open and betray my self;
It was a subtle and a dangerous plot,
And very soundly followed, farewell Lady,
Let me have equal hearing, and relate
I am an honest man. Heaven save the King. 
I'll never leave him, till by art or prayer
I have restored his senses, If I make
Him perfect man again, he's mine still, when
I here abjure all loves of other men. 
Nay, good Sir be persuaded, go but back,
And tell him hoe's undone, say nothing else;
And you shall see how things will work upon it.
Not so good Jaques, I am held an ass
A country fool, good to converse with durte
And eat course bread, wear the worst wool,
Know nothing but the high way to Paris,
And would thou have me bring these stains,
And imperfections to the rising view
Of the right worshipful thy worthy Master?
They must be bright and shine, their clothes
Soft velvet and the trojan purple
Like the Arabian gums, hung like the Sun,
Their golden beams on all sides;
Such as these may come and know,
Thy Master, I am base and dare not speak unto him,
Hoe's above me.
If ever you did love him, or his state,
His name, his issue, or your self, go back:
Twill be an honest and a noble part
Worthy a kinsman, save 300 acres
From present execution; they have had sentence,
And cannot be reprieved, be merciful.
Have I not urged already all the reasons,
I had to draw him from his will? his ruin?
But all in vain, no counsel will prevail,
Has fixed himself, ther's no removing Jaques,
'Twil prove but breath and labour spent in vain,
I'll to my horse, farewell.
For Gods sake Sir,
As ever you have hope of joy turn back;
I'll be your slave for ever, do but go,
And I will lay such fair directions to you
That if hee be not doting on his fall,
He shall recover sight, and see his danger,
And ye shall tell him of his wives abuses,
I fear, to foul against him; how she plots,
With our young Mounsiers, to milk dry her husband,
And lay it on their backs, the next her pride,
Then what his debts are, and how infinite
The curses of his tenants, this will work
I'll pawn my life and head, he cries away,
I'll to my house in the Country.
Come I'll go, and once more try him,
If he yield not, so,
The next that tries him shall be want and woe. 
Jaques.
Sir. 
Rise Jaques it is grown day,
The country life is best, where quietly
Free from the clamour of the troubled Court,
We may enjoy our own greene shadowed walks,
And keep a moderate diet without art.
Why did I leave my house and bring my wife,
To know the manner of this subtle place?
I would when first the lust to fame an honour,
Possessed me, I had met with any evil.
But that, had I been tied to stay at home
And earn the bread for the whole family
With my own hand happy had I been.
Sir this is from your wonted course at home,
When did ye there keep such inordinate hours?
Go to bed late? start thrice? and call on me?
Would you were from this place; our Country sleeps,
Although they were but of that moderate length
That might maintain us in our daily work.
Yet were they sound and sweet.
I Jaques, there we dreamt not of our wives, wee lay together;
And needed not; now at length my Cozins words,
So truly meant, mixed with thy timely prayers
So often urged, to keep me at my home,
Condemn me quite.
It was not your fathers course:
He lived and died in Orleans, where he had
His Vines as fruitful as experience
(Which is the art of husbandry) could make;
He had his presses for 'em, and his wines
Were held the best, and out-sold other men's,
His corn and cattle served the neighbour Towns
With plentiful provision, yet his thrift
Could miss one beast amongst the heard,
He ruled more where he lived, then ever you will here.
It is true, why should my wife then against my good,
Persuade me to continue in this course?
Why did you bring her hither at the first,
Before you warmed her blood with new delights!
Our country sports could have contented her,
When you first married her; a puppet-play
Pleased her as well as now the tilting doth.
She thought her self brave in a bugle chain,
Where Orient pearl will scarce content her now.
Sure Jaques, she sees something for my good
More then I doe, she oft will talk to me
Of offices, and that she shortly hopes
By her acquaintance with the friends she hath
To get a place shall many times outway
Our great expenses, and if this be so—
Think better of her words, she doth deceive you,
And only for her vain and sensual ends
Persuade ye thus. Let me be set to dwell
For ever naked in the barest soil
So you will dwell from hence.
I see my folly,
Pack up my stuff, I will away this morn.
Haste—haste.
I, Now I see your Fathers honours
Trebling upon you, and the many prayers
The country spent for him, which almost now
Begun to turn to curses, turning back,
And falling like a timely shower
Upon ye.
Go, call up my wife.
But shall she not prevail,
And sway you, as she oft hath done before?
I will not hear her, but rail on her
Till I be ten miles off.
If you be forty,
Twill not be worse Sir:
Call her up,
I will Sir. 
Why what an Ass was I that such a thing
As a wife is could rule me?
Know not I that woman was created for the man,
That her desires, nay all her thoughts should be
As his are? is my sense restored at length?
Now she shall know, that which she should desire,
She hath a husband that can govern her,
If her desires leads me against my will;
Are you come?
What sad unwonted course
Makes you raise me so soon, that went to bed
So late last-night.
O you shall go to bed sooner hereafter,
And be raised again at thrifty hours,
In Summer-time we'll walk
An hour after our supper, and to bed,
In winter you shall have a set at Cards,
And set your maids to work.
What do you mean?
I will no more of your new tricks, your honours,
Your offices, and all your large preferments,
Which still you beat into my ears, hang ore me.
I'll leave behind for others, the great sway
Which I shall bear at Court: my living here
With countenance of your honoured friends
I'll be content to loose: for you speak this
Only that you may still continue here
In wanton ease: and draw me to consume
In clothes and other things idle for show
That which my Father got with honest thrift.
Why, who hath been with you Sir,
That you talk thus out of Frame.
You make a fool of me:
You provide one to bid me forth to supper
And make me promise; then must some one or other
Invite you forth, if you have borne your self
Loosely to any Gentleman in my sight
At home, you ask me how I like the carriage,
Whether it were not rarely for my good,
And opened not a way to my preferment?
Come I perceive all: talk not, we will away.
Why Sir, you'll stay till the next triumph
Day be past?
I, you have kept me here trium•hinge
This seven years, and I have ridden through the streets,
And bought embroyderd hose and foote-cloths too,
To show a subjects zeal, I rode before
In this most gorgeous habit, and saluted
All the acquaintance I could espy
From any window, these were ways ye told me
To raise me; I see all: make you ready straight,
And in that gown which you came first to Town in,
Your safe-guard, cloak, and your hood suitable:
Thus on a duble gelding shall you amble,
And my man Jaques shall be set before you.
But will you go?
I will.
And shall I too?
And you shall too.
But shall I by this light?
Why by this light you shall.
Then by this light
You have no care of your estate, and mine.
Have we been seven years venturing in a ship,
And now upon return with a fair wind
And a calm sea, full fraught with our own wishes
Laden with wealth and honour to the brim,
And shall we fly away and not receive it?
Have we been tilling, sowing, labouring
With pain and charge a long and tedious winter,
And when we see the corn above the ground,
Youthful as is the morn and full ear
That promises to stuff our spacious garners,
Shall we then let it rot, and never reap it?
Wife talk no more, your Retoricke comes too late,
I am inflexible; and how dere you
Adventure to direct my course of life?
Was not the husband mad to rule the wife?
It is true but where the man doth miss his way,
It is the women's part to set him right;
So Fathers have a power to guide their Sons
In all their courses, yet you oft have seen
Poor little children that have both their eyes
Lead their blind Fathers.
She has a plaguy wit,
I say you're but a little piece of man.
But such a peace, as being tan away
Man cannot last: the fairest and tallest ship,
That ever sailed, is by a little peace of the same
Wood, steered right, and turned about.
It is true she says, her answers stand with reason.
But Sir, your Cozin put this in your head
Who is an enemy to your preferment,
Because I should not take place of his wife;
Come by this kiss thou shalt not go sweet heart.
Come, by this kiss I will go Sweet-heart,
On with your riding stuff; I know your tricks,
And if preferment fall ere you be ready,
It is welcome, else adieu the City life.
Well Sir I will obey.
About it then,
To please your humour I would dress my self,
In the most loathsome habit you could name
Or travel any whether ore the world
If you command me, it shall near be said
The frailty of a woman whose weak mind,
Is often set on loose delights and shows,
Hath drawn her husband to consume his state,
In the vain hope of that which never fell.
About it then, women are pleasant creatures,
When once a man begins to know himself.
But hark you Sir because I will be sure,
You shall have no excuse, no word to say
In your defence hereafter; when you see
What honours were prepared for you and me
Which you thus willingly have thrown away,
I tell you I did look for present honour,
This morning for you, which I know had come
But if they do not come ere I am ready
(Which I will be the sooner least they should)
When I am once set in a country life,
Not all the power of earth shall alter me,
Not all your prayers or threats shall make me speak
The Least words to my honourable friends
To do you any grace.
I will not wish it.
And never more hope to be honourable,
My hopes are lower.
As I live you shall not,
You shall be so far from the name of noble
That you shall never see a Lord again;
You shall not see a mask, or Barriers,
Or tilting or a solemn christening,
Or a great marriage, or new fire-works,
Or any bravery; but you shall live
At home bespotted with your own loved dirt
In scurvy clothes as you were wont to doe,
And to content you I will live so too.
It is all I wish, make hast the day draws on,
It shall be my care to see your stuff pact up.
It shall be my care to gul you: you shall stay. 
And more then so entreat me humbly too
You shall have honours presently; Maria.
Madam.
Bring hither, pen, ink, and paper.
It is here.
Your Master Will not stay,
Unless preferment come within an hour.
Let him command one of the City gates
In time of mutiny, or you may provide him,
To be one of the counsel for invading,
Some savage country to plant christian faith.
No, no, I have it for him, call my page
Now my dear husband there it is will fit you. 
And when the world shall see what I have done,
Let it not move the spleen of any wife,
To make an ass of her beloved husband
Without good ground, but if they will be drawn
To any reason by you, do not gull them;
But if they grow conceited of themselves,
And be fine Gentlemen, have no mercy,
Publish them to the world, twill do them good
When they shall see their follies understood,
Go bear these letters to my servant,
And bid him make hast, I will dress my self,
In all the journey clothes I used before
Not to ride but to make the laughter more. 
Is all pact up?
All, all Sir, there is no tumbler,
Runs throw his hoop with more dexterity
Then I about this business: tic a day
That I have long longed to see.
Come wheres my spurs?
Here Sir, and now it is come.
I Jaques now
I thank my fates, I can command my wife.
I am glad to see it Sir.
I do not love always,
To be made a puppy, Iaques.
But yet me thinks your worship does not look,
Right like a country Gentleman.
I will, give me my tother hat.
Here.
So, my Jerkin.
Yes Sir.
On with it Jaques, thou and I
Will live so finely in the country, Jaques,
And have such pleasant walks into the woods
A mornings, and then bring whom riding rods,
And walking staves—
And I will bear them Sir,
And skurdge-sticks for the children.
So thou shalt,
And thou shalt do all, over see my work folks
And at the weeks end pay them all their wages.
I will Sir, so your worship give me money.
Thou shalt receive all too: give me my drawers
They are ready Sir.
And I will make thy Mistress,
My wife, look to her laundry and her dairy,
That we may have our linen clean on Sundays.
And holy days.
I and ere we walk about the grounds
Provide our breake-fast,
Or she shall smoke, I'll have her a good huswife
She shall not make a voyage to her sisters,
But she shall live at home,
And feed her pullen fat, and see her maids
In bed before her, and locke all the doors
Why that will be a life for Kings and Queens.
Give me my Scarf with the great button quickly.
It is done Sir.
Now my Mittens.
Here they are Sir.
It is well? now my great dagger.
There.
Why so; thus it should be, now my riding rod.
There's nothing wanting Sir.
Another, man, to stick under my girdle.
There it is.
All is well.
Why now me thinks your Worship looks
Like to your self, a man of means and credit,
So did your grave and famous Ancestors,
Ride up and down to fairs, and cheapen cattle.
Go, hasten your Mistress, Sir.
It shall be done. 
Who's that? who's that boy?
I think it be my Master.
Who, he that walks in gray whisking his riding rod?
Yes Sir, it is he.
It is he indeed; he is prepared
For his new journey; when I wink upon you
Run out and tell the Gentleman it is time—
Monsieur good day.
Monsieur your Mistress is within, but yet not ready.
My business is with you Sir; it is reported,
I know not whether by some enemy
Maliciously that envies your great hopes,
And would be ready to sow discontents
Betwixt his Majesty and you, or truly,
Which on my faith I would be sorry for,
That you intend to leave the Court in hast.
Faith Sir within this half hour. Iaques?
Sir?
Is my wife ready?
Presently.
But Sir,
I needs must tell you as I am your friend,
You should have tan your journey privater
For it is already blazed about the Court.
Why Sir, I hope it is no Treason, is it?
It is true Sir, but it is grown the common talk,
There's no discovery else held, and in the presence
All the Nobility and Gentry
Have nothing in their mouths but only this,
Monsieur Marine that noble Gentleman,
Is now departing hence, every mans face
Looks ghastly on his fellows, such a sadness
(Before this day) I ne'er beheld in Court,
Men's hearts begin to fail them when they hear it,
In expectation of the great event
That needs must follow it, pray heaven it be good!
Why I had rather all their hearts should fail
Then I stay here until my purse fail me.
But yet you are a Subject, and beware
I charge you by the love I bear to you
How you doe venture rashly on a course
To make your sovereign jealous of your deeds
For Princes jealousies where they love most,
Are easily found, but they be hardly lost.
Come these are tricks, I smell 'em, I will go.
Have I not still professed my self your friend?
Yes, but you never showed it to me yet.
But now I will, because I see you wise,
And give ye thus much light into a business
That came to me but now, be resolute,
Stand stiffly to it that you will depart,
And presently.
Why so I mean to doe.
And by this light you may be what you will;
Will you be secret Sir?
Why? what's the matter?
The King does fear you.
How?
And is now in Counsel;
About me;
About you, and you be wise,
You'll find hoe's in Counsel about you?
His Councellors have told him all the truth.
What truth?
Why? that which now he knows too well.
What is it?
That you have followed him seven years
With a great train: and though he have not graced you,
Yet you have dived into the hey ts of thousands,
With liberality and noble carriage;
And if you should depart home unprefer'd
All discontented, and seditious spirits
Would flock to you and thrust you into action:
With whose help, &amp; your Tenants, who doth not know
(If you were so disposed:)
How great a part of this yet fertile peaceful realm of Fran.
You might make desolate? but when the King
Heard this —
what said he?
Nothing, but shook,
As never Christian Prince did shake before.
And to be short you may be what you will?
But be not ambitious Sir, sit down
With moderate honours, least you make your self
More feared.
I know Sir what I have to doe
In mine own business. 
Whore's Monsieur Mount Marine.
Why there he stands, will you ought with him?
Yes: Good day Monsieur Marine.
Good day to you.
His Majesty doth commend himself,
Most kindly to you Sir, and hath by me,
Sent you this favour: kneel down, rise a Knight.
I thank his Majesty.
And he doth further request you,
Not to leave the Court so soon,
For though your former merits have been slighted,
After this time there shall no Office fall;
Worthy your spirit, as he doth confess
There's none so great, but you shall surely have it.
Do you hear, if you yield yet you are an ass.
I'll show my service to his Majesty
In greater things then these, but for this small one
I must entreat his Highness to excuse me.
I'll bear your Knightly words unto the King,
And bring his Princely answer back again. 
Well said, be resolute a while, I know
There is a tide of honours coming on.
I warrant you.
Where is this new made Knight?
Here Sir.
Let me enfold you in my arms,
Then call you Lord, the King will have it so,
Who doth entreat your Lordship to remember
His message sent to you by Longavile.
If ye be dirty, and dare not mount aloft;
You may yield now, I know what I would do.
Peace, I will fit him; tell his Majesty
I am a Subject, and I do confess
I serve a gracious Prince, that thus hath heaped
Honours on me without desert, but yet
As for the message, business urges me,
I must be gone, and he must pardon me,
Were he ten thousand Kings and Emperors.
I'll tell him so.
Why, this was like your self.
As he hath wrought him, it is the finest fellow
That ere was Christmas Lord, he carries it
So truly to the life, as though he were
One of the plot to gull himself. 
Why so, you sent the wisest and the shrewdest
Unto the King, I swear, my honoured friend
That ever any Subject sent his Liege.
Nay now I know I have him on the hip,
I'll follow it.
My honourable Lord,
Give me your noble hand right courteous Peer,
And from henceforth be a courtly Earl;
The King so wills, and Subjects must obey:
Only he doth desire you to consider
Of his request.
Why faith your well my Lord, yield to him.
Yield? why it was my plot.
Nay it was your wives plot.
To get preferment by it,
And thinks he now to pop me ith mouth
But with an Earldom, Isle be one step higher.
It is the finest Lord, I am afraid anon
He will stand upon it to share the Kingdom with him.
Wher's this Courtly Earl?
His Majesty commends his love unto you;
And will you but now grant to his request,
He bids you be a Duke, and choose of whence.
Why if you yield not now, you are undone,
What can you wish to have more, but the Kingdom?
So please his Majesty, I would be Du. of Burgundy
Because I like the place.
I Know the King is pleased.
Then will I stay and kiss his Highness hand.
His Majesty will be a glad man when he hears it.
But how shall we keep this from the worlds ear
That some one tell him not, he is no Duke?
We'll think of that anon.
Why Gentlemen, is this a gracious habit for a Duke?
Each gentle body set a finger to
To pluck the clouds of this his riding weeds
From off the orient sun of his best cloths;
I'll pluck one boot and spur off.
I another.
Isle pluck his Jerkin off.
Sit down my Lord;
Both his spurs off at once good Longavile
And Bewford take that scarf off, and that hat
Doth not become his largely sprouting fore-head.
Now set your gracious foot to this of mine,
One pluck will do it, so, off with the other.
Lo thus your servant Longavile doth pluck
The trophy of your former gentry off,
Off with his Jerkin Bewford.
Did thou never see
A nimble footed Taylor stand so in his stockings,
Whilst some friend help to pluck his Jerkin off,
To dance a Jig?
Here's his man Jaques come
Booted and ready still.
My Mistress stays;
Why how now Sir? what do your Worship mean,
To pluck your grave and thrifty habit off?
My slippers, Jaques.
O thou mighty Duke
Pardon this man,
That thus hath trespassed in ignorance.
I pardon him.
His Graces slippers, Jaques.
Why what's the matter?
Foot-man, hoe's a Duke:
The King hath raised him above all his land.
I'll to his Cousin presently, and tell him so;
O what a dung-hill country rogue was I! 
See, see, my Mistress.
Let's observe their greeting.
Unto your will as every good wife ought,
I have turned all my thoughts, and now am ready.
O Wife I am not worthy to kiss the least
Of all thy toes, much less thy thumb,
Which yet I would be bold with; all thy counsel
Hath been to me Angelical, but mine to thee
Hath been most dirty like my mind:
Dear Duchess I must stay.
What are you mad to make me
Dress, and undress, turn and wind me,
Because you find me pliant? said I not
The whole world should not alter me, if once
I were resolved? and now you call me Duchess:
Why what's the matter?
Lo a Knight doth kneel.
A Knight?
A Lord.
A fool.
I say doth kneel an Earl, a Duke.
In drawers.
Without shoes.
Sure you are lunatic.
No honoured Duchess
If you dare but believe your servants truth,
I know he is a Duke.
God save his Grace.
I ask your Graces pardon.
Then I rise,
And here in token that all strife shall end
Twixt thee and me, I let my drawers fall
And to thy hands I do deliver them:
Which signifies, that in all acts and speeches,
From this time forth my wife shall wear the breeches.
An honourable composition. 
Shall I believe thee Iaques.
Sir you may.
Did thou not dream?
I did not.
Nor imagine?
Neither of both: I saw him great and mighty,
I saw the Monsieurs bow, and heard them cry
Good health and fortune to my Lord the Duke.
A Duke art sure? a Duke?
I am sure a Duke,
And so sure as I know my self for Jaques.
Yet the sun may dazzle? Jaques, was it not
Some lean Commander of an angry Block-house
To keep the sleamish Eele-boats from invasion,
Or some bold Baron able to despond
His fifty pounds a year, and meet the foe
Upon the Kings command in gilded canvas,
And do his deeds of worth? or was it not
Some place of gain, as Clerk to the great Band
Of maribones, that people call the Switzers?
Men made of beufe, and sarcenet?
Is a Duke his chamber hung with Nobles like a presence?
I am something wavering in my faith;
Would you would settle me, and swear it is so,
Is he a Duke indeed?
I swear he is.
I am satisfied, he is my Kinsman. Jaques,
And I his poor unworthy Cousin.
True Sir.
I might have been a Duke too, I had means,
A wife as fair as his, and as wise as his;
And could have brooked the Court as well as his,
And laid about her for her husbands honour:
O Jaques had I ever dreamt of this,
I had prevented him.
Faith Sir it came
Above our expectation, we were wise
Only in seeking to undo this honour,
Which showed our dung-hill breeding and our dirt.
But tell me Iaques,
Why could we not perceive? what dull Devil
Wrought us to cross this noble course, persuading
It would be his overthrow? for me a Courtier
Is he that knows all, Iaques, and does all,
It is as his noble Grace hath often said,
And very wisely, Jaques, we are fools,
And understand just nothing.
I, as we were, I confess it.
But rising with our great Master,
We shall be called to knowledge with our places,
It is nothing to be wise, not thus much there,
Ther's not the least of the billet dealers,
Nor any of the Pastry, or the Kitchen,
But have it in measure delicate.
Me thinks this greatness of the Dukes my Cozens
(I ask you mercy, Iaques, that near name
Is too familiar for me) should give promise
Of some great benefits to his attendants.
I have a suite my self, and it is sure,
Or I mistake my ends much.
What is 't Iaques,
May I not crave the place?
Yes Sir you shall,
It is to be but his Graces Secretary,
Which is my little all, and my ambition,
Till my known worth shall take me by the hand
And set me higher; how the fates may do
In this poor thread of life is yet uncertain;
I was not born I take it for a trencher,
Nor to espouse my Mistress Dairy-maid.
I am resolved my wife shall up to Court;
I'll furnish her, that is a speeding course,
And cannot choose but breed a mighty fortune;
What a fine youth was I, to let him start,
And get the rise before me? I'll dispatch
And put my self in moneys.
Mass it is true,
And now you talk of money, Sir my business
For taking those Crowns must be dispatcht?
This little plot in the Country lies most fit
To do his Grace such serviceable uses,
I must about it.
Yet before you go
Give me your hand, and bear my humble service
To the great Duke your Master, and his Duchess,
And live your self in favour: say my wife
Shall there attend them shortly, so farewell.
I'll see you mounted Sir.
It may not be,
Your place is far above it, spare your self,
And know I am your servant, fare ye well. 
Sir I shall rest to be commanded by you;
This place of Secretary will not content me,
I must be more and greater, let me see,
To be a Baron is no such great matter
As people take it: for say I were a Count,
I am still an under person to this Duke,
Which me thinks sounds but harshly: but a Duke?
O I am strangely taken, it is a Duke
Or nothing, I'll advise upont, and see
What may be done by wit and industry. 
It must be carried closely with a care
That no man speak unto him, or come near him
Without our private knowledge, or be made
Afore-hand to our practice:
My good husband
I shall entreat you now to stay a while,
And prove a noble coxcomb:
Gentlemen,
Your counsel and advice about this carriage.
Alas good man, I do begin to mourn
His dire massacre: what a persecution
Is pouring down upon him? sure he is sinful.
Let him be kept in 's chamber under show
Of state and dignity, and no man suffered
To see his noble face, or have access,
But we that are Conspirators.
Or else down with him into the country amongst his Tenants,
There he may live far longer in his greatness,
And play the fool in pomp amongst his fellows.
No, he shall play the fool in the City, and stay
I will not loose the greatness of this jest
That shall be given to my wit for the whole revenues.
Then thus we'll have a guard about his person,
That no man come too near him, and ourselves
Always in company; have him into the City
To see his face swell; whilst in divers corners,
Some of our own appointing shall be ready
To cry heaven bless your Grace, long live your Grace.
Servant, your counsels excellent good,
And shall be followed, twill be rarely strange
To see him stated thus, as though he went
A shroving through the City, or intended
To set up some new stake:
I shall not hold
From open laughter when I hear him cry
Come hither my sweet Duchess: let me kiss
Thy gracious lips: for this will be his phrases?
I fear me nothing but his legs will break
Not•r his mighty weight of such a greatness.
Now me thinks dearest Lady you are too cruel;
His very heart will freeze in knowing this.
No, no, the man was never of such deepness
To make conceit his Master: Sir I'll assure ye
He will out-live twenty such pageants.
Were he but my Cozen or my Brother,
And such a desperate killer of his fortune,
In this belief he should dye, though it cost me
A thousand crowns a day to hold it up;
Or were I not known his wife, and so to have
An equal feeling of this ill he suffers,
He should be thus till all the boys in the Town
Made suit to wear his badges in their hats,
And walk before his Grace with sticks and nose-gayes,
We married women hold—
It is well, no more.
The Duke is entering, set your faces right,
And bow like Country prologues: here he comes.
Make room before, the Duke is entering.
The chiefest fortunes waite upon our Duke,
And give him all content and happiness.
Let his great name live to the end of time.
We thank you, and are pleased to give you notice
We shall at fitter times wait on your Loves,
Till when, be near Us.
It is a valiant purge, and works extremely;
'Tas delivered him
Of all Right worshipful and gentle humours,
And left his belly full of nobleness.
It pleased the King my Master
For sundry virtues not unknown to him,
And the all-seeing state, to lend his hand
And raise me to this Imminence, how this
May seem to other men, or stir the minds
Of such as are my fellow Peers, I know not,
I would desire their loves in just designs.
Now by my faith he does well, very well:
Beshrew my heart I have not seen a better
Of a raw fellow, that before this day
Never rehearsed his state: it is marvellous well.
Is he not Duke indeed, see how he looks
As if his spirit were a last, or two
Above his veins, and stretched his noble hide.
Hoe's high brac't like a drum, pray God he break not.
Why let him break, ther's but a Calves-skin lost.
May it please your Grace to see the City,
Twill be to the minds and much contentment
Of the doubtful people.
I am determined so, till my return
I leave my honoured Duchess to her chamber.
Be careful of your health, I pray you be so.
Your grace shall suffer us your humble servants
To give attendance fit so great a person
Upon your body.
I am pleased so.
Away good Bewford, raise a guard sufficient
To keep him from the reach of tongues, be quick;
And do you hear, remember how the streets
Must be disposed with for cries, and salutations.
Your grace determines not to see the King—
Not yet, I shall be ready ten days hence
To kiss his highness hand, and give him thanks,
As it is fit I should for his great bounty
Set forward Goentlemen.
Room for the Duke there. 
It is sit he should have room to show his mightiness,
He swells so with his poison,
It is better to reclaim ye thus, then make
A sheeps-head of you, It had been but your due;
But I have mercy Sir, and mean to reclaim you
By a directer course.
That woman is not worthy of a soul
That has the sovereign power to rule her husband,
And gives her title up, so long provided
As there be fair play, and his state not wronged.
I would be glad to know whence this new Duke springs,
The people buzz abroad, or by what title
He received his dignity, it is very strange
There should be such close juggling in the State,
But I am tied to silence, yet a day
May come, and soon to perfect all these doubts.
It is the mad Shattillion by my soul
I suffer much for this poor Gentleman;
I'll speak to him, may be he yet knows me.
Monsieur Shattillion.
Can you give me reason from whence
This great Duke sprang that walks abroad?
Even from the King himself.
As you are a woman, I think you may be coverd
Yet your prayer would do no harm good woman.
God preserve him.
I say Amen, and so say all good subjects.
Lady as ever you have loved, or shall,
As you have hope of heaven lend your hand,
And wit to draw this poor distracted man
Under your roof from the broad eyes of people,
And wonder of the streets.
With all my heart;
My feeling of his grief and loss is much.
Sir now you are come so near the prison, will ye
Go in, and visit your fair Love: poor soul
She would be glad to see you.
This same Duke is but
Apocryphal, there's no creation
That can stand where titles are not right.
It is true Sir.
This is another draught upon my life;
Let me examine well the words I spake.
The words I spake were, that this novel Duke
Is not ot'h true making, it is to me most certain.
You are as right Sir as you went by line.
And to the grief of many thousands more.
If there be any such, God comfort them.
Whose mouths may open when the time shall please;
I'm betrayed, commend me to the King,
And tell him I am sound, and crave but justice;
You shall not need to have your guard upon me,
Which I am sure are placed for my attachment;
Lead on; I'm obedient to my bonds.
Good Sir be not displeased with us;
We are but servants to his highness will,
To make that good.
I doe forgive you even with my heart;
Shall I entreat a favour?
Any thing.
To see my love before that fatal stroke,
And publish to the world my christian death,
And true obedience to the Crown of France.
I hope it shall not need Sir, for there is mercy
As well as justice in his Royal heart. 
Every man take his corner, here am I,
You there, and you in that place, so be perfect,
Have a great care your cries be loud; and faces
Full of dejected fear and humbleness.
He comes.
Fie how these streets are charged and swoll'd
With these same rascally people? give more room,
Or I shall have occasion to distribute
A martial alms amongst you; as I am a Gentleman
I have not seen such rude disorder,
They follow him like a prize, there's no true gaper
Like to your Citizen, he will be sure
The bears shall not pass by his door in peace,
But he and all his family will follow.
Room there before? Sound?
Give room, and keep your places
And you may see enough; keep your places.
These people are too far unmannered, thus
To stop your Graces way with multitudes.
Rebuke them not good Monsieur it is their loves
Which I will answer, if it please my stars
To spare me life and health.
Bless your Grace.
And you with all my heart.
Now heaven preserve your happy days:
I thank you too.
Now heaven save your Grace;
I thank you all.
On there before.
Stand Gentlemen, stay yet a while,
For I am minded to impart my love
To these good people, and my friends
Whose love and prayers for my greatness,
Are equal in abundance, note me well,
And with my words; my heart? for as the tree—
Your Grace had best beware, 'twil be informed
Your greatness with the people.
I had more
My honest and ingenious people.—But
The weight of business hath prevented me.
I am called from you: but this tree I spake of
Shall bring forth fruit I hope to your content,
And so I share my bowels amongst you all.
A noble Duke, a very noble Duke.
Before there Gentlemen.
You're faithfully met good Monsieur Mount Marine.
Be advised, the time is altered.
Is he not the same man he was before?
Still the same man to you Sir.
You have received mighty grace, be thankful.
Let me not dye in ignorance;
You shall not.
Then know the King out of his love hath pleased
To stile him Duke of Burgundy.
O great Duke,
Thus low, I plead for pardon, and desire
To be enrol'd amongst your poorest slaves.
Sir you have mercy, and withal my hand,
From henceforth let me call you one of mine.
Make room before there, and dismiss the people.
Every man to his house in peace and quiet.
Now heaven preserve the Duke, heaven bless the Duke.
This letter came this morn from my Cozen
To the great Lady, high and mighty Duchess
Of Burgundy, be these delivered O,
For a stronger lace to keep my breath
That I may laugh the nine days till the wonder
Fall to an ebb: the high and mighty Duchess?
The high and mighty God? what a stile is this?
Methinks it goes like a Duchy lope-man,
A ladder of 100. rounds will fail
To reach the top on it, well my Gentle Cozen
I know by these contents your itch of honour;
You must to the Court, you say, and very shortly:
You shall be welcome; and if your wife have wit
I'll put her in a thriving course, if not
Her own sin on her own head, not a blot
Shall stain my reputation, only this
I must for healths sake sometimes
Make an ass of the tame moil my husband;
Twill do him good, and give him fresher brains,
Me fresher blood.
Now for the noble Duke, I hear him coming.
Your Grace is well returned.
As well as may be:
Never in younger health, never more able:
I mean to be your bed-fellow this night,
Let me have good encounter.
Bless me heaven
What a hot meat this greatness is?
It may be so,
For I'll be sworn he hath not got a snap
This two months on my knowledge, or her woman
Is damned for swearing it.
I thank you Gentlemen for your attendance
And also your great pains, pray know my lodgings
Better and oftner, do so Gentlemen.
Now by my honour, as I am a Prince,
I speak sincerely, know my lodgings better,
And be not strangers, I shall see your service
And your deservings, when you least expect.
We humbly thank your Grace for this great favour.
Jaques?
Your Grace.
Be ready for the Country,
And let my Tenants know the Kings great love:
Say I would see them, but the weight at Court
Lies heavy on my shoulders: let them know
I do expect their duties in attendance
Against the next feast, wait for my coming
To take up post horse, and be full of speed. 
I would desire your Grace—
You shall desire, and have your
Full desire, sweet Duchess speak.
To have some conference with a Gentleman
That seems not altogether void of reason?
He talks of titles, and things near the Crown,
And knowing none so fit as your good Grace,
To give the difference in such points of State—
What is he? If he be noble, or have any part
That's worthy our converse, We do accept him.
I can assure your Grace his strain is noble,
But he's very subtle.
Let him be so.
Let him have all the brains, I shall demonstrate
How this most Christian Crown of France can bear
No other show of title then the Kings.
I will go in and meditate for half an hour,
And then be ready for him presently,
I will convert him quickly or confound him.
Is mad Shattillion here?
Is here, and's Lady,
I prithee servant fetch him hither.
Why, what do you mean to put him to?
To chat with the mad lad my husband;
Twill be brave to hear them speak, babl,
Stare, and prate.
But what shall be the end of all this, Lady?
Leave that to me, now for the grand dispute,
For see here comes Shattillion: as I live me thinks
All France should bear part of his griefs.
I le fetch my Lord the Duke.
Where am I now, or whether will you lead me?
To my death? I crave my privilege,
I must not dye but by just course of law.
His Majesty hath sent by me your pardon,
He meant not you should dye; but would entreat you
To lay the full state of your Title open,
Unto a grave and noble Gentleman.
The Duke of Burgundy who here doth come,
Who either by his wisdom will confute you,
Or else inform and satisfy the King.
May 't please your grace, this is the Gentleman.
Is this he that chops •ogicke with my liege?
Dee mock me? you are great, the time will come
When you shall be as much contemned as I,
Where are the ancient complements of France,
That upstarts brave the Princes of the blood?
Your title Sir, in short.
He must Sir,
Be a better states man then your self, that can
Trip me in any thing, I will not speak
Before these witnesses.
Depart the room, for none shall stay,
No not my dearest Duchess.
We'll stand behind the Arras &amp; hear all. 
In that chair take your place, I in this,
Discourse your title now.
Sir you shall know,
My loves true title, mine by marriage,
Setting aside the first race of French Kings
Which will not here concern us, as Pharamond,
With Clodian, Moron, and Chilperik,
And to come down unto the second race,
Which we will likewise slip—
But take me with you.
I pray you give me leave, of Martell Charles,
The Father of King Pippin, who was, Sir,
To Charles the great and famous Charlemain.
And to come to the third race of French Kings,
Which will not be great lie pertinent in this cause,
Betwixt the King and me, of which you know
HVGH CAPET was the first,
Next his Son Robert, Henry then, and Phillip
With Lewis, and his Son a Lewis too,
And of that name the seventy, but all this
Springs from a female as it shall appear.
Now give me leave, I grant you this your title
At the first sight carries some show of truth;
But if ye weigh it well ye shall find light.
Is not his Majesty possessed in peace,
And justice executed in his name,
And can you think the most Christian King
Would do this if he saw not reason for it?
But had not the tenth Lewis a sole daughter?
I cannot tell.
But answer me directly.
It is a most seditious question.
Is this your justice?
I stand for my King.
Was ever heir apparent thus abused?
I'll have your head for this.
Why, do your worst.
Will no one stir to apprehend this traitor?
A guard about my person will? none come?
Must my own royal hands perform the deed?
Then thus I do arrest you.
Treason, help.
Help, help, my Lord and husband.
Help thy Duke.
Forbear his graces person.
Forbear you to touch him that,
Your heir apparent weds,
But by this hand I will have all your heads. 
How doth your grace?
Why? well.
How do you find his title?
It is a dangerous one,
As can come by a female.
I 't is true,
But the law Salicke, cuts him off from all.
I do beseech your grace how stands his title?
Pew, nothing, the law Shallicke cuts him off from all
My gracious husband you must now prepare,
In all your graces pomp to entertain
Your cozen, who is now a convertite,
And follows here, this night he will be here.
Be ready all in hast, I do intend,
To show before my cozens wondering face
The greatness of my pomp, and of my place.
Sir is all things carried to the Taylor,
The measure and the fashion of the gown
With the best trim?
Yes Sir &amp; twill be ready within this two days.
For my self I care not,
I have a suite or two of ancient velvet;
Which with some small correcting and addition
May steal into the presence.
Would my Gown were ready husband, I'll lay my life,
To make you something ere to morrow night.
It must not bee
Before we see the Duke, and have advice,
How to behave ourselves: lets in the while,
And keep our selves from knowledge till time shall call us
I much admire the fierce masculine spirit,
Of this dread Amazon.
This following night I'll have a wench in solace.
Sir, I hear you,
And will be with you if I live, no more.
My Lady would entreat your presence Gentleman.
We will obey your Lady, she is worthy.
You light alone, a word, or two.
Your will Sir.
Hark in your ear, wilt thou be married? speak, wilt thou marry?
Married? to whom Sir?
To a proper fellow, landed, and able bodied,
Why do you flout me Sir?
I swear I do not, I love thee for thy Ladies sake, be free,
If I could meet such matches as you speak of,
I were a very child to loose my time, Sir.
What says thou to Monsieur Bewford.
Sir I say hoe's a proper Gentleman, and far
Above my means to look at.
Dost thou like him?
Yes Sir, and ever did.
He is thine own.
You are too great in promises.
Be ruled and follow my advice, he shall be thine
Would you would make it good Sir.
Do but thus,
Get thee a cushion underneath thy clothes,
And leave the rest to me.
I'll be your scholar,
I cannot loose much by the venture sure.
Thou wilt loose a pretty maiden head, my rogue,
Or I am much of the bow hand, you'll remember
If all this take effect, who did it for you,
And what I may deserve for such a kindness.
Yours Sir. 
Save ye Sir.
Save the King.
I pray you Sir, which is the nearest way?
Save the King, this is the nearest way.
Which is the nearest way to the post house?
God save the King and his post horse.
I pray Sir direct me to the house;
Heaven save the King, you cannot catch me Sir.
I do not understand you Sir.
You do not, I say you cannot catch me Sir.
Not catch you Sir?
No Sir, nor can the King,
With all his stratagems, and his forced tricks,
Although he put his nobles in disguise;
Never so oft to sift into my words,
By course of law, lay hold upon my life.
It is business that my Lord the Duke
Is by the King employed in, and he thinks
I am acquainted with it.
I shall not need to rip the cause up,
From the first to you,
But if his Majesty had suffered me
To marry her, though she be after him,
The right heir general to the Crown of France.
I would not have convayed her into Spain,
As it was thought, nor would I ere have joined,
With the reformed Churches to make them,
Stand for my cause.
I do not think you would.
I thank you Sir,
And since I see you are a favorer
Of virtues, kept in bondage;
Tell directly to my sovereign King,
For so I will acknowledge him for ever,
How you have found my staid affections
Settled for peace, and for the present state.
Why Sir?
And good Sir tell him further this,
That notwithstanding all suggestions
Brought to him against me and all his suspicions,
Which are innumerall to my treasons,
If he will warrant me but public trial,
I'll freely yield my self into his hands;
Can he have more then this?
No by my troth.
I would his Majesty would hear but reason,
As well as you.
But Sir you do mistake me,
For I never saw the King
In all my life but once, therefore good Sir,
May it please you to show me which is the post house.
I cry you mercy Sir, then you're my friend.
Yes Sir.
And such men are very rare with me,
The post house is hard by, farewell;
I thank you Sir, I must ride hard to night,
And it is dark already.
I am cruel to send this man directly to his death
That is my friend, and I might easily save him,
He shall not dye, come back my friend, come back.
What is your will?
do you not know?
Not I.
And do you gather nothing by my face?
No Sir.
Virtue is ever innocent,
La not the fault on me, I grieve for you,
And wish that all my tears might win your safety.
Why Sir?
Alas good friend you are undone,
The more ill fortune, mine to be the means
Of your sad overthrow: you know not me.
No truly Sir.
Would you had never seen me,
I am a man pursued by the whole state
And sure some one hath seen me talk with you.
Yes divers Sir.
Why then your head is gon.
I'll out of town.
Would it were soon enough,
Stay if you love your life, or else you are taken.
What shall I do?
I'll venture deeply for him,
Rather then to cast away an innocent,
Take courage friend, I will preserve thy life,
With hazard of mine own.
I thank you Sir.
This night thou shalt be lodged within my doors,
Which shall be all looked fast, and in the morn
I'll so provide, you shall have free access,
To the Sea side and so be shipped away,
Ere any know it.
Good Sir suddenly I am afraid to dye.
Then follow me. 
This way he went, and there's the house I hope,
His better Angel hath directed him,
To leave the wandering streets, poor Gentleman.
Would I were able with as free a hart,
To set his soul right, as I am to grieve,
The ruin of his fame, which God forgive me;
Sir if you be within, I pray Sir speak to me.
I am within and will be, what are you?
A friend.
No Sir you must pardon me,
I am acquainted with none such: be speedy,
Friend there is no other remedy.
A word Sir I say I am your friend.
You cannot scope by any other means,
Be not fearful, God save the King,
What's your business Sir?
To speak with you.
Speak out then?
Shall I not come up?
Thou shalt not: fly if thou be thin own friend,
There lies the suit and all the furniture
Belonging to the head, on with it friend.
Sir do you hear?
I do, God bless the King,
It was a habit I had laid aside,
For my own person if the state had forced me.
Good Sir unlock your door.
Be full of speed, I see some 20 Musketeers in ambush,
What ere thou art, know I am here and will be,
See thou this bloody sword that cries revenge?
Shake not my friend, through millions of these foes
I'll be thy guard and set thee safe aboard.
Dare you not trust me Sir?
My good before me,
And my alleagance to the King I tell thee
Captain (for so I guess thee by thy arms)
And the loose flancks of halberdeeres about thee,
Thou art too weak and foolish to attempt me.
If you be ready follow me, and hark you
Upon your life speak to no living wight,
Except my self.
Monsieur Shattillion?
Thou shalt not call again; thus with my sword,
And the strong faith I bear unto the King;
Whom God preserve, I will descend my chamber,
And cut thy throat, I swear I'll cut thy throat,
Steal after me and live.
I will not stay.
The fury of a man so far distracted. 
Whore's the Officer that dares not enter,
To entrap the life of my distressed friend?
I, have you hid your self? you must be found,
What do you fear? is not authority on your side
Nay, I know the Kings command
Will be your warrant, why then fear you? speak
What strange designs are these? Shattillion,
Be resolute and bear thy self upright,
Though the whole world despise thee: soft, me thinks.
I heard a rushing which was like the shake
Of a discovered Officer, I'll search
The whole street over, but I'll find thee out. 
How my joints do shake, where had I been
But for this worthy Gentleman, that
Hath some touch of my infortunes: would I were
Safe under hatches once for Callicut,
Farewell the pomp of Court, I never more
Can hope to be a Duke or any thing,
I never more shall see thy glorious face;
Of my fair spreading Lord that loved me well.
Fly you so fast? I had a sight of you,
But would not follow you; I was too wise,
You shall not lead me with a cunning trick,
Where you may catch me; poor Shatillion;
Hath the Kings anger left thee never a friend?
No, all men's loves move by the breath of Kings.
It is the Gent. that saved my life, Sir.
Bless Shatillion, another plot.
No Sir, it is I.
Why, who are you?
Your friend whom you preserved.
Whom I preserved?
My friend? I have no woman friend but one,
Who is to close in prison to be here;
Come near let me look on you.
It is I.
You should not be a woman by your stature.
I am none Sir.
I know it, then keep off,
Strange men and times! how I am still preserved?
Here they have sent a yeoman of the guard
Disguised in women's clothes to work on me,
To make love to me; and to trap my words,
And so ensnare my life, I know you Sir,
Stand back upon your peril, can this bee
In christian common weals? from this time forth
I'll cut off all the means to work on me.
I'll ne'er stir from my house: and keep my doors
Locked day and night, and cheapen meat and drink
At the next shops by signs, out of my window,
And having bought it draw it up in my garters.
Sir, will you help me?
Do not follow me,
I'll take a course to live despite of men. 
He dares not venture for me, wretched Jaques
Thou art undone for ever and for ever,
Never to rise again: what shall I do?
Where shall I hide me? here is one to take me,
I must stand close, and not speak for my life.
This is the time of night, and this the haunt,
In which I use to catch my wasccoatieres,
It is not very dark, no I shall spy 'em,
I have walked out in such a pitchy night.
I could not see my fingers this far off,
And yet have brought whom venson by the smell,
I hope they have not left their old walk, ah?
Have I spied you sitting by this light?
To me theres no such fine sight in the world,
As a white-apron twixt twelve and one;
See how it glisters? do you think to scope?
So now I have you fast; come and do not strive,
It takes away the edge of appetite;
Come I'll be liberal every way, 
Take heed you make no noise for waking of the watch.
Now the blessing of some happy guide,
To bring us to the Duke and we are ready.
Come forward see the door is opend,
And two of his Gent. I'll speak to them,
And mark how I behave my self, God save ye;
For less I cannot wish to men of sort, &amp; of your seeming
Are you of the Dukes?
We are Sir, and your servants, your salutes,
We give you back again with many thanks.
When did you hear such words before wife? peace,
Do you not dare to answer yet; s't fit
So mean a Gentleman as my self should crave,
The presence of the great Duke your Master?
Sir you may.
Shall we desire your name and business Sir,
And wee will presently inform him of you.
My name is Cleremont
You are his graces kinsman,
Or I am much mistaken;
You are right,
Some of his noble blood runs through these veins,
Though far unworthy of his graces knowledge.
Sir we must all be yours; his graces kinsman,
And we so much forgetful? it was a rudeness,
And must attend your pardon, thus I crave it:
First to this beauteous Lady, whom I take
To be your wife Sir, next your mercy.
You have it Sir, I do not like this kissing,
It lies so open to a world of wishes.
This is the merry fellow, this is he
That must be noble too.
And so he shall.
If all the art I have can make him noble,
I'll dub him with a Knight-hood; if his wife
Will be but forward, and join issue,
I like her above excellent.
Wilt please you
To walk a turn or two, whilst to the Duke
We make your coming known? 
I shall attend, Sir.
These Gentlemen are very proper men,
And kiss the best that ere I tasted.
For goodnesse-sake husband let us never more
Come near the Country, what so ere betide us;
I am in malice with the memory
Of that same stinking dung-hill.
Why now you are my chicken and my dear,
Love where I love, hate where I hate, now
You shall have twenty gowns, and twenty chains,
See, the door is opening.
Room before there, the Duke is entering.
It is the Duke, even he himself, be merry,
This is the golden age the Poet speaks on.
I pray it be not brazened, by their faces,
And yet me thinks they are the neatest pieces
For shape and cutting that ere I beheld.
Most gracious Duke, my poor Spouse &amp; my self
Do kiss your mighty foot, and next to that
The great hand of your Duchess, ever wishing
Your honours ever-springing, and your years.
Cozen?
Your Graces vassal, far unworthy
The nearness of your blood.
Correct me not, I know the word I speak,
And know the person.
Though I be something higher then the place
Where common men have motion, and descending
Down with my eye, their forms are lessened to me,
Yet from this pitch can I behold my own,
From millions of those men that have no mark,
And in my fearful stoop, can make them stand.
When others feel my soul and perish, Cozen
Be comforted, you are very welcome, so
Is your fair wife: the charge of whom I give
To my own dearest and best beloved.
Tell me, have you resolved your self for Court,
And utterly renounce the slavish Country,
With all the cares thereof?
I have sir.
Have you dismissed your eating household,
Sold your hangings of Nebuchadnezar, for such they were,
As I remember, with the furnitures
Belonging to your beds and chambers?
I Sir.
Have you most carefully tan off the lead,
From your roof weak with age, and so prevented
The ruin of your house, and clapped him
In a summer suite of thatch to keep him cool?
All this I have performed.
Then lend me all your hands, I will embrace my Cozen
Who is an understanding Gentleman,
And with a zeal mighty as is my name,
Once more I bid you welcome to the Court;
My state again.
As I was telling you your husband
Must be no more Commander, look to that,
Be several at meat, and lodging, let him have
Boord-wages and diet amongst his men it'h town
For pleasure if he be given too't let him have it,
Else as your own fancy shall direct you.
Cozen, you see this mighty man here: he was an ass
When he came first to town: indeed he was
Just such another coxcomb as your husband,
God bless the mark and every good mans child!
This must not stir you Cozen.
Heaven forbid?
Sweet Maria, provide the cushion ready for it.
It shall be done.
Receive all your advises from our self,
Be once a day with us, and so farewell
For this time, my fair Cozen; Gentlemen
Conduct him to his lodging.
Farewell, and think upon my words.
I shall observe them. 
Health, and the Kings continual love attend you.
O for a private place to ease my lungs!
Heaven give me patience, such a pair of Jades
Were never better ridden to this hour,
Pray heaven they hold out to the journeys end.
Twitch him aside good Monsieur, whilst I break
Upon the body of his strength, his wife,
I have a constant promise: she is my own.
Ply her to wind-ward Monsieur, you have taken
The most compendious way to raise your self,
That could have been delivered by a council.
I have some certain aims Sir: but my wife—
Your wife? you must not let that trouble you.
It will Sir, to see her in a strangers arms.
What mean you? let her alone, be wise, stir not a foot
For if you do, all your hopes are buried:
I swear you are a lost man if you stir.
I thank you Sir, I will be more advised.
But what great Office do you level at?
Sir, they are kissing.
Let them kiss,
And much may do their good hearts; they must kiss
And kiss, and double kiss, and kiss again,
Or you may kiss the post for any rising:
Had your noble Kinsman ever mounted
To these high Spheres of honour, now he moves in,
But for the kisses of his wife?
I Know not.
Then I doe; credit me, he had been lost,
A fellow of no mark, and no repute,
Had not his wife kissed soon, and very sweetly
She was an excellent woman, and dispatcht him
To his full, being in a moment Sir— 
But yet me thinks he should not take her Sir
Into a private room.
Now stand and flourish,
You are a made man for ever.
I doe envy you if you stand your fortunes up,
You are the happiest man: but your great Cozen
This day in Court: well I will marry surely,
And not let every man out-run me thus.
It is time to be mine own friend, I live
In town here, and direct the readiest way,
To other men, and be a slave my self.
Nay good Sir be not moved, I am your servant,
And will not be ungrateful for this knowledge.
Will you be walking home?
I would de•ire to have my wife a long.
You are too raw,
Be gon and take no notice where you left her,
Let her return at leisure, if she stay
A month twill be the better, understand me
This Gentleman can do it. 
I will Sir, &amp; wife remember me a Duke, a Duke wife.
Aboard her Longaveile shoe's thine own,
To me the fooling of this fool, is venery. 
Come, prithee come, have I not crowns? behold
And follow me, here; not a word, go in
Grope by the walls, and you shall find a bed,
Lye down there, see, see, a turn or two to give
My blood some heate; and I am presently
For action, darkness by thy leave I come. 
I am perfect in my lesson, be my speed,
Thou God of marriage, this is the door, I'll knock.
Whose there? I cannot come yet.
Monsieur Bewford?
Stay 'till I light a candle, who are ye?
Sir? a poor Gentlewoman.
O come in, I'll find a time for you too, be not loud.
Sir you have found that time already, shame
On my soul therefore.
Why? what's the matter?
Do you not see Sir, is your light so dim?
Do you not waite on the Lady Mount Marine?
I do Sir, but my love on you.
Poor soul! how came thou by this big belly?
By your self.
By heaven I ne'er touched your body.
Yes, unsweare that oath again, I'll tell you all;
These two years I have loved you, but the means
How to enjoy you, I did never know
Till twelfe night last, when hearing of your game
To take up wenches private in the night,
I apprehended straight this course to make
My self as one of them, and waite your coming;
I did so, and enjoyed you, and now this child
That now is quick within me: hide my shame,
And marry me: or else I must be forced—
Monsieur Bewford, Monsieur Bewford.
Whose that calls?
Are you a bed?
No Sir, the hangings.
Nay Monsieur, I'll forbid that, we will have fair play
Lend me your candle, are you taken Bewford?
A lecher of your practice, and close carriage
To be discovered thus? I am a shamed
So great a Master in his art should fail,
And stagger in his grounds.
Your wide,
This woman and my self are man and wife,
And have been so this half year,
Where are you now? have I been discovered?
You cannot break so easily on me Sir,
I am to wary to be opend by you.
But these are but illusions to give colour
To your most misticke lechery, but Sir
The belly hath betrayed you all, it must out.
Good Longavile believe me on my faith,
I am her husband.
On my faith I cannot unless I saw
Your hands fast and your hearts.
Why Longavile when did I give that to your ears
That was not truth? by all the world she's mine,
She is my wife and to confirm you better
I give my self again, here take my hand
And I yours, we are once more married,
Will this content you?
Yes, I am believing, and God give you joy.
My loving wife I will not wrong thee,
Since I am thine and only loved of thee
From this hour I, vow my self a new man,
Be not jealous: for though I had a purpose,
To have spent an hour or two in solace otherwise,
And was provided for it, yet my love
Shall put a better temper to my blood,
Come out thou woman of unholsome life,
Be sorry for thy sins, and learn to mend,
Nay never hide your face, you shall be seen.
Jaques, why Jaques, art thou that Jaques,
The very staff, and right hand of our Duke?
Speak, thou bearded Venus.
I am he, by miracle preserved to be that Jaques,
Within this two hours Gentlemen, poor Jaques
Was but as coarse in grave: a man of wisdom,
That of my conscience if he had his right
Should have a pretty state, but that's all one
That noble Gentleman did save this life,
I keep it for him, it is his own.
Oh Bachus! is all the world drunk? come we'll to the Duke
And give thanks for this delivery.
Not gon unto my Tenants to relate
My grace and honour; and the mightiness
Of my new name which would have struck a terror
Through their course doublets, to their very hearts?
Alas great Lord and Master, I could scarce
With safety of my life return again
Unto your graces house, and but for one
That had some mercy, I had sure been hanged.
My house?
Yes Sir, this house, your house 'ith town.
Jaques we are displeased, hath it no name?
What name?
Dull rogue; what hath the King bestowed
So many honours, opened all his springes,
And showerd his graces down upon my head,
And has my house no name? no title yet?
Burgundy house you Ass.
Your graces mercy,
And when I was come off, and had recovered
Burgundy house, I durst not yet be seen,
But lay all night for fear of pursuiuants
In Burgundy privy house.
O Sir, it is well,
Can you remember now? but Jaques know
Since thy intended journey is so crossed,
I will go down my self this morning.
Sir?
Have I not said this morning?
But consider,
That nothing is prepared yet for your journey,
Your graces teames not here to draw your clothes;
And not a carrier yet in town to send by.
I say once more go about it,
You're a wise man, you'd have m• linger time,
Till I have worn these clothes out: will ye go?
Make ye ready wife. 
I am so, mighty Duke.
Nay for the Country.
How? for the Country?
Yes I am resolved to see my Tenants in this bra∣very
Make them a sumptuous feast, with a slight show,
Of Dives, and Lazarus, and a squib or two,
And so return.
Why Sir? you are not mad?
How many Dukes have ye known mad? I pray speak.
You are the first Sir, and I hope the last,
But you are stark horn mad.
Forbear good wife.
As I have faith you're mad: your horns
Have been to heavy for you, and have broke
Your skull in pieces: If you be in earnest.
Well you shall know my skull and wits are whole
Ere I have done, and yet I am in earnest.
Why, do you think I'll go?
I know you shall.
I shall? by what authority shall I?
I am your husband.
True I confess it,
And by that name the world hath given you
A power to sway me; but Sir you shall know
There is a greater bond that ties me here,
Alleagance to the King; has he not heaped
Those honours on you to no other end,
But to stay you here, and shall I have a hand
In the offending such a gracious Prince?
Besides, our own undoings lies uppon't,
Were there no other cause, I do not see,
Why you should go: If I should say you should not.
Do you think so?
Yes faith.
Now good wife make me understand that point.
Why that you shall, did I not bring you hither?
Yes.
And were not all those honours wrought out of the fire by me?
By you?
By me; how strange you make it?
When you came first did you not walk the Town,
In a long cloak half compass? an old hat,
Lined with valor, and on it for a band,
A skein of crimson cruel?
I confess it.
And took base courses?
Base?
Base by this light, extreme base, and scurvy, monstrous base.
What were these courses, wife?
Why you shall know,
Did you not thus attired trot up and down,
Plotting for wild and lousy offices,
And agreed with the Sergeant of the bears,
To buy his place? deny this if you can.
Why it is true.
And was not that monstrous base?
Be advised wife, a bears a princly beast.
A bear?
Yes wife, and one side venson.
You're more then one side fool, I'm sure of that
But since you have vexed me wife, know you shall go
Nor you shall never have penny from me.
Nay I have done, and though I know twill be
Your overthrow, I'll not forsake you now.
Be ready then. 
I will.
What are you married Bewford?
I as fast as words, and hearts, and hands &amp; Priest can make us.
O Gentlemen, we are undone.
For what?
This Gentleman the Lord of lorn my husband,
Will be gon down to show his play fellows,
Where he is gay.
What, down into the Country?
Yes faith, was ever fool but he so cross?
I would as fine be gracious to him,
As he could wish me, but he will not let me;
Speak faithfully, will he deserve my mercy?
According to his merits he should wear,
A guarded coat, and a great wooden dagger.
If there be any woman that doth know,
The duties twixt a husband and his wife,
Will speak but one word for him he shall scope;
Is not that reasonable? but ther's none,
Be ready therefore, to pursue the plot
We had against a pinch, for he must stay.
Wait you here for him whilst I go
And make the King acquainted with your sport,
For fear he be incensed for our attempting;
Places of so great honour. 
Go, be speedy.
Come let me see how all things are disposed of.
One Cart will serve for all your furniture,
With room enough behind to ease the footman
A capcase for your linen, and your plate,
With a strange locke that opens with Amen;
For my young Lord because of easy portage,
A quiver of your graces lined with Cunney,
Made to be hanged about the Nurses neck,
Thus with a scarf or towel.
Very good.
Nay, it is well, but had you staid another week,
I would have had you, furnished in such pomp,
As never Duke of Burgundy was furnished,
You should have had a sumpter though't had cost me
The laying on my self: where now you are fine,
To hire a rippers mare, and buy new dossers,
But I have got them painted with your arms,
With a fair darnex Carpet of my own
Laid cross for the more state.
Jaques I thank you: your Carpet shall be brushed
And sent you home; what, are you ready wife?
An hour ago
I cannot choose but kiss thy royal lips,
Dear Duchess mine, thou art so good a woman.
Yould say so if you knew all, goodman Duckling.
This was the happiest fortune could befall me
Now in his absence will I follow close
Mine own preferment, and I hope e ere long,
To make my mean and humble name so strong,
As my great Cozens, when the world shall know,
I bear too hot a spirit to live low
The next Spring will I down my wife and household,
I'll have My Ushers, and my four Lackeys,
Six spare croches too: but mum, no more,
What I intend to do, I'll keep in store.
Mountye, mountye, Iaques, be our equerry.
To horse there Gentlemen, and fall in couples.
Come honoured Duchess. 
Stand thou proud man.
Thieves, Iaques, raise the people.
No, raise no people, it is the Kings command,
Which bids thee once more stand thou haughty man,
Thou art a monster, for thou art ungrateful,
And like a fellow of a rebel nature,
Hast flung from his embraces: and for
His honours given thee, hast not returned
So much as thanks, and to oppose his will,
Resolved to leave the Court, and set the Realm
A fire, in discontent, and open action:
Therefore he bids thee stand thou proud man,
Whilst with the whisking of my sword about
I take thy honours off: this first sad whisk
Takes off thy Duke-dome, thou art but an Earl.
You are mistaken, Longavile.
O would I were, this second whisk divides
Thy Earldom from thee, thou art yet a Baron.
No more whisks if you love me Longavile.
Two whisks are past, and two are yet behind,
Yet all must come, but not to linger time.
With these two whisks I end, now Mount Marine,
For thou art now no more, so says the King,
And I have done his Highness will with grief.
Disgraced from my honours?
It is too certain.
I am no Traitor sure that I know of;
Speak Iaques? hast thou ever heard me utter word
Tending to treason, or to bring in the enemy?
Alas sir I know nothing,
Why should your Worship bring me in to hang me?
God's my judge Gentlemen I never meddled
But with the brushing of his clothes, or fetching
In water in a morning for his hands.
Are these the honours of this place? Antony
Help me to take her gown off quickly
Or I'll so swinge ye for it—
Why husband? Sir?
I'll not loose a penny by this town.
Why what do you mean sir, have her to her lodging,
And there undress her, I will waite upon her.
Indeed you shall not, your month is out I take it,
Get you out before me wife:
Cousin farewell, I told you long ago,
That pride begins with pleasure, ends with woe.
Go thy way sentences, twill be thy fortune,
To live and dye a Cuckold and Church-warden.
O my poor husband! what a heavy fortune
Is fallen upon him?
Me thinks it is strange,
That heaven fore-warning great men of their falls,
With such plain tokens, they should not avoid them?
For the last night betwixt eleven and twelve,
Two great and hideous blazing stars were seen
To fight a long hour by the clock, the one
Dressed like a Duke, the other like a King,
Till at the last the crowned star ore-came.
Why do ye stand so dead, Monsieur Marine?
So Caesar fell when in the Capitol
They gave his body two and thirty wounds.
Be warned all ye Peers, and by my fall,
Hereafter learn to let your wives rule all.
Monsieur Marine, pray let me speak with you;
Sir I must wave you to conceal this party,
It stands upon my utter overthrow;
Seem not discontented, nor do not stir a foot,
For if you do, you and your hope—
I swear you are a lost man if you stir.
And have an eye to Bewford, he'll tempt you.
Come, come, for shame go down;
Were I Marine, by heaven I would go down:
And being there, I would rattle him such an answer
Should make him smoke.
Good Monsieur Bewford peace
Leave these rebellious words,
Or by the honours which I once enjoyed,
And yet may swear by,
I'll tell the King of your proceedings;
I am satisfied.
You talked of going down when it was not fit,
But now let's see your spirit,
A thousand and a thousand will expect it.
Why wife, are you mad?
No nor drunk, but I'd have you know your own strength
You talk like a most foolish woman wife;
I tell you I will stay, yet I have a
Crotchet troubles me.
More crotchets yet?
Follow me Jaq. I must have thy counsel,
I will return again, stay you there Wife.
I fear this loss of honour will give him some few stools.
No, no, he is resolved, he will not
Stir a foot I'll lay my life.
I but hoe's discontented, how shall we resolve that
And make him stay with comfort?
Faith Bewford we must even let nature work,
For hoe's the sweetest tempered man for that
As one can wish, for let men but go about to fool him,
And he will have his finger as deep in 't as the best;
But see where he comes frowning, bless us all!
Off with your hats, for here doth come
The high and mighty Duke of Burgundy.
What ever you may think, I have thought
And thought, and thought upon it, and I find it plain,
The King cannot take back what he has given,
Unless I forfeit it by course of Law.
Not all the water in the river Scene,
Can wash the blood out of these Princely veins.
God a mercy husband, thou art the best
To work out a thing at a pinch, in France.
I will ascend my state again,
Duchess take your place,
And let our Champion enter.
Has he his Champion? that's excellent.
And let loud music sound before his entrance.
Sound Trumpet.
How well our Champion doth demean himself,
As if he had been made for such an action?
Me thinks his sturdy truncheon he doth wield,
Like Mars approaching to a bloody field.
I think ther's no man so desperate
To dare encounter with our Champion,
But trust me, Iaques, thou hast pleased us well;
Once more our warlike music, then proceed. 
What wondrous age is this? what close proceedings?
I hear the clang of Trumpets in this house,
To what intent do not our States-men search?
O no, they look not into simple truth;
For I am true, and they regard not me,
A man in armour too: God save the King
The world will end, theres nought but treachery.
I Ja. servant to the high &amp; mighty Godfrey Duke of Burgundy, do come hither to prove by natural strength and activity of my body, without the help of sorcery, enchant¦meant, or necromancy, that the said Godfrey late of Mount Marine, &amp; now of Burgundy, hath perfect right thereto, not∣withstanding the Kings command to the contrary, &amp; no other person whatsoever: &amp; in token that I will be ready to make good the same: I throw down my gage, which is my ho∣nor, pronounced the 37. of Feb. stilo novo, God save the D.
Of all the plots the King hath laid for me
This was the shrewdest, it is my life they seek,
And they shall have it: if I should refuse
To accept the challenge in the Kings behalf,
They have some cause to take away my life,
And if I do accept it, who can tell,
But I may fall by doubtful chance of war?
It was shrewd, but I must take the least of evils,
I take thy gauntlet up thou treacherous man,
That stands in armed coat against the King,
Whom God preserve, and with my single sword
Will justify whatever he commands;
I'll watch him for catching of my words.
Jaques go on, defend our Princely title.
Why shrinkst thou back? thou hast an evil cause;
Come forward man, I have a rock about me,
I fight for my true Liege.
Go forward Jaques.
I do beeseech your Grace to pardon me,
I will not fight with him, with any else
I'll show my resolution speedily.
Come do thy worst, for the King shall see
All is not true that is reported of me.
I may not fight with him by law of arms.
What? shall my title fall? wilt thou not fight?
Never with him that once hath saved my life.
Dare thou not fight? behold then I doe go
Strong with the zeal I bear my Sovereign,
And seize upon that haughty man himself.
Descend the steps that (thou hast thus usurped
Against the King and State) down to the ground,
And if thou doe utter but a syllable
To cross the Kings intent, thou art but dead;
There, lye upon the earth and pine and dye.
Did ever any man wade through such storms,
To save his life, as poor Shattillion?
I fear this challenge hath spoiled all.
Ne'er fear it, he will work it out again servant.
See where Shattillions Love, poor Lady, comes. 
Jaques.
Lye still sir if you love your life, I'll whistle when he's gone,
O Gentlemen, I charge you by the love
Which you bear to women, take some pity
On this distressed man, help to restore
That precious jewel to him he hath lost.
Lady what ever power doth lye in us
By art or prayer, or danger, we are yours,
A strange conceit hath wrought this malady,
Conceits again must bring him to himself,
My strict denial to his will wrought this?
And if you could but draw his wilder thoughts
To know me, he would sure recover sense.
That charge I'll undertake.
Look Jaques, look, for Gods sake let me rise,
This greatness is a Jade, I cannot sit it.
His sword is up, and yet he watches you.
I'll down again, pray for thy Master, Jaques.
Now the King may see all the suggestions are not true,
He hath received against my loyalty;
When all men else refuse, I fight his battles,
And thrust my body into dangers mouth;
I am become his Champion, and this sword
Has taught his enemies to know themselves;
O that he would no more be jealous of me!
Monsieur Shattillion, the King assigns you,
That for this valiant loyal act of yours,
He hath forgot all jealousies and fears,
And never more will tempt you into danger.
But how shall I believe this? what new token
Of reconcilement will he show me?
Let him release my poor love from her torment,
From her hard fare and strict imprisonment.
He hath done this to win your after-love,
And see your Lady sent you from the King
By these two Gentlemen: be thankful for her.
She lives, she lives, I know her by the power
Shoots from her eyes.
Rise dear Sbattillion.
I Know my duty,
Next unto my King, I am to kneel to you.
I'll have you rise, fetch me a chair, sit down Shat.
I am commanded, and faith tell me Mistress,
What usage have you had? pray be plain?
O my most loved Shattillion, pain enough,
But now I am free, thanks to my God and King.
His eyes grow very heavy, not a word,
That his weak senses may come sweetly home.
The King is honourable.
When do you whistle Jaques?
By and by.
Come hither Monsieur, can thou laugh a little?
Yes Sir.
So thou shalt then. Bewford how dost thou?
Why well.
I'm glad on it, and how does thy wife?
Why you may see her Sir, she stands behind you.
By the mass she's there indeed, but wher's her belly?
Belly?
Her great belly man: what hast thou sent thee?
A boy I'll lay my life, it tumbled so.
Caught by this light.
I'll be a gossip Bewford.
And I.
I have an odd Apostle spoon.
S' foot caught.
Why what's the matter Gentlemen?
He's married to your woman.
And I not know it?
It was a venial sin.
Gall, gall, gall.
Forgive her Monsieur Bewford, it was her love.
You may rise if you please, I must endure it.
See how my great Lord lies upon the ground
And dare not stir yet?
Jaques, whistles?
Jaques, Jaq. is the Kings Champion gone yet,
No, but hoe's asleep.
Is he asleep art sure?
I am sure he is, I hear him snore.
Then by your favours Gentlemen I rise,
And know I am a Duke still.
And I am his Champion.
Hold thee there, and all France cannot mend thee.
I am a Prince as great within my thoughts
As when the whole state did adorn my person;
What trial can be made to try a Prince?
I will oppose this noble corps of mine
To any danger that may end the doubt.
Great Duke and husband there is but one way
To satisfy the world of our true right,
And it is dangerous.
What may it be?
Were it to bring the great Turk bound in chains
Through France in triumph: or to couple up
The Sophie, and great Proctor Iohn together,
I would attempt it Duchess, tell the course.
There is a strong opinion through the world,
And no doubt grounded on experience
That Lyons will not touch a lawful Prince,
If you be confident then of your right,
Amongst the Lions bear your naked body,
And if you come off clear and never winch,
The world will say you are a perfect Prince.
I thank you Duchess for your kind advice,
But now we do not affect those ravenous beasts.
A Lyon is a beast to try a King;
But for the trial of such a state like this
Pliny reports a mastiff dog will serve.
We will not deal with dogs at all: but men.
You shall not need to deal with them at all,
Hark you Sir, the King doth know you are a Duke:
No, does he?
Yes, and is content you shall be, but with this caution,
That none know it but your self:
For if ye do, he'll take it away by act of Parliament.
Here's my hand, and whilst I live or breath,
No living wight shall know I am a Duke.
Mark me directly Sir, your wife may know it.
May not Jaques?
Yes, he may.
May not my country Cousin?
By no means sir, if you love your life and state.
Well then, know all I am no Duke.
No I'll swear it.
See he wakes.
Where am I, or where have I been all this while?
Sleep hath not sate so sound upon mine eyes
But I remember well that face;
O thou too cruel, leave at length to scorn
Him that but looking on thy beauty dyes,
Either receive me, or put out my eyes.
Dearest Shattillion see upon my knees,
I offer up my love, forget my wrongs.
Art thou mine own?
By heaven I am.
Then all the world is mine.
I have stranger things to tel thee, my dearest love.
Tell nothing but that thou art mine own:
I do not care to know where I have been,
Or how I have lived, or any thing,
But that thou art my own.
Well wife, though it were a trick that made us wed,
We'll make our selves merry soon in bed.
Know all I am no Duke.
What say?
Jaques?
Sir.
I am a Duke.
Are ye?
Yes faith, yes faith.
But it must only run amongst our selves,
And Jaques thou shalt be my Secretary still.
Kind Gentlemen, lead in Shattillion,
For he must needs be weak and sickly yet.
Now all my labours have a perfect end as I could wish,
Let all young sprightly wives that have
Dull foolish Coxcombs to their husbands,
Learn by me their duties, what to doe,
Which is to make 'em fools, and please 'em too.
WIt is become an antique: and puts on
As many shapes of variation,
To court the times applause, as the times dare,
Change several fashions, nothing is thought rare
Which is not new and followed, yet we know,
That what was worn some twenty year ago,
Comes into grace again, and we pursue
That custom, by presenting to your view
A play in fashion then, not doubting now
But twill appear the same, if you allow
Worth to their noble memory, whose name,
Beyond all power of death live in their fame.
THe Monuments of virtue and desert,
Appear more goodly when the gloss of art
Is eaten off by time, then when at first
They were set up, not censured at the worst.
We have done our best for your contents to fit
With new pains this old monument of wit.

