WEll ore tan my Lord.
Noble friend welcome, and see who encoun∣ters vs, honourable good Clerimon.
My good Lord Lyon, most happily met worcester∣thy Traefilme,
Come gallants, whats the newcs,
the season affords vs variety,
the nouilsts of our time runs on heaps,
to glut their itching ears with airy sounds,
trotting to'th burse; and in the Temple walk
with greater zeal to hear a novel lye,
then a pious Anthum tho chanted by Cherubins.
True Sir:
and holds set counsels, to vent their brain sick opinions
with presagements what all states shall design.
Thats as their intelligence serves.
And that shall serve as long as invention lastes,
there dreams they relate, as spoke from Oracles,
or if the gods should hold a synod, and make them their secretaries,
they will divine and prophecy too: but come and speak your
thoughts of the intended marriage with the Spanish Prince,
He is come you see, and bravely entertained.
Hee is so, but not married yet.
But like to be, and shall have in dowry with the Princess this Kingdom of Cecil.
Soft and fair, there is more will forbid the baines, then say amen to the marriage: though the King usurped the Kingdom, during the non-age of the Prince Phylaster, hee must not think to bereave him of it quite; hee is now come to years to claim the Crown.
And lose his headi' the asking.g.
A diadem worn by a headless King wold be wondrous, Phylaster is too weak in power.
He hath many friends.
And few helpers.
The people love him.
I grant it, that the King knows too well,
And makes this Contract to make his faction strong:
Whats a giddy-headed multitude,
That's not Disciplinde nor trained up in Arms,
To be trusted unto? No, he that will
Bandy for a Monarchy, must provide
Brave marshall troops with resolution armed,
To stand the shock of bloody doubtful war,
Not daunted though disastrous Fate doth frown,
And spit all spiteful fury in their face:
Defying horror in her ugliest form,
And grows more valiant, the more danger threats;
Or let lean famine her affliction send,
Whose pining plagues a second hell doth bring,
Thei'le hold their courage in her height of spleen,
Till valour win plenty to supply them,
What think ye, would yer feast-hunting Citizens
Endure this?
No sir, a fair march a mile out of town that their wives may bring them their dinners, is the hottest service that they are trained up to.
I could wish their experience answered their loves,
Then should the much too much wronged Phylaster,
Possess his right in spite of Don and the devil.
My heart is with your wishes.
And so is mine,
And so should all that loves their true borne Prince,
Then let vs join our Forces with our minds,
In whats our power to right this wronged Lord,
And watch advantage as best may fit the time
To stir the murmuring people up,
Who is already possessed with his wrongs,
And easily would in rebellion rise,
Which full well the King doth both know and fear,
But first our service we'll proffer to the Prince,
And set our proiects as he accepts ofvs;
But hushed, the King is coming.
Fair Prince,
Since heavens great guitar furthers our intents,
And brought you with safety here to arrive
Within our Kingdom and Court of Cecil,
We bid you most welcome, Princely Pharamont,
And that our Kingly bounty shall confirm,
Even whilst the Heavens hold so propitious aspect
We'll crown your wished desires (with our own)
Lend me your hand sweet Prince, hereby enjoy
A full fruition of your best contents,
The interest I hold I doe possess you with,
Only a fathers care and prayers retain,
That heaven may heap on blessings, take her Prince,
A sweeter Mistress then the offered Language of any dame,
were she a Queen whose eye speaks common Loves;
and comfort to her servants: Last Noble son, for so I now must call you, what I have done thus public, is not to add a comfort in parti∣cular to you or me, but all, and to confirm the Nobles and the Gentry of our Kingdom by oath to your succession: which shall be within this month at most.
This will be hardly done.
It must be ill done, if it be done.
When it is at best, twill bee but half done,
whilst so brave a gentleman is wronged and slung off.
I fear.
Who dos not?
I fear not for my self, and yet I fear too:
well, we shall see, we shall see: no more.
Kissing your white hand Mistress I take leave, to thank your royal Father: and thus far to be my own free from∣pet: understand great King, and these your subjects, mine that must be, for so deserving you have spoke me Sir: and so deserving I dare speak my self, to what a person of what Eminence, ripe expect∣tion, of what faculties, manners and virtues you would wed your Kingdoms, and in me have your wishes: oh this country, by more then all the gods, I hold it happy, happy in their door memories, that have bin Kings great and good; happy in yours that is, and from you as a Chronicle to keep your noble name from rotting Age: do I open my self most happy: Gentlemen believe me in a word, a Princes word, there shall be nothing to make up a Kingdom migh∣tie and flourishing, defenced feared equal to be commanded and o∣beyed but through the travels of my life, isle find it out, and tie it to this country. By all the gods; my Reign shall bee as easy to the subjects, that every man shall bee his Prince himself, and his own Law; Yet I his Prince and Law. And dearest Lady, to your dee∣rest self, dear in the choice of him, whose name and lustre, must make you more and mightier: Let me say you are the blessedest li∣uing: for sweet Princess, you shall enjoy a man of men, to bee your servant, you shall make him yours, for whom great Queens must d e.
Miracles!
This speech calls him Spaniard, being nothing
but a large Inuentorie of his own commendations.
I wonder whats his price?
for certainly he'll sell him, he has so be praisd his shape:
But here comes one, more worthy those large praises, then the large speaker of them; Let me bee swallowed quick, if I can find all the Anatomy of yon mans virtues unseen to sound enough, to promise for him, hee shall bee Constable by this Sun: he'll ne'er make King, unless it be of trifles in my poor judgment.
Right noble sir, as low as my obedience,
with a heart as loyal as my knee, I beg for favour.
Rise, you have it sir.
Mark but the King how pale he looks, he fears,
and this same whoreson conscience, ah how it jade vs.
Speak your intents sir.
Shall I speak on freely, be still my royal Sovereign.
As a subject we give you freedom.
Now it heats.
Then thus I turn my language to you Prince, you foreign man ne'er start, nor put on wonder; you must endure me, and you shall: This earth you tread upon, a dowry as you hope with this sweet Princess, whose memory I bow to, was not left by my dead fa∣there, O I had a father: to your inheritance, and I up and living, ha∣uing my self about me and my sword the souls of all my name and memories: these arms and some few friends besides the gods to part so calmly with it, and sit still and say I might have bin, I tell thee Pharamont, when thou art King, look I be dead and rotten, and my name ashes, as I: for hear me Pharamont, this very ground thou goosed on, this fat earth my fathers friends made fertile with their faiths: before that day of shame shall gape and swollow thee and thy nation, like a hungry grave into his hidden bowels: Prince it shall, by the just gods it shall.
Hoe's mad, beyond cure mad.
Here is a fellow has some fire in his veins,
the outlandish Prince looks like a tooth-drawer.
I Prince of popines, I will make it well appear
to you I am not mad.
You displease vs, you are too bold.
No sir, I am too tame, too much a Turcle,
A thing borne without passion, a faint shadow:
That every drunken cloud sails over,
And make nothing.
I doe not fancy this choler,
Sure hoe's somewhat tainted.
I doe not think twill prove so.
Has given him a general purge already, for all the right he
has, and now he means to let him blood: be constant
gentle heavens, I'll run his hazard although
I run my name out of the Kingdom.
Peace, we are all one soul.
What you have seen in me to stir offence,
I cannot find, unless it be this Lady offered into my arms,
with the succession which I must keep: though is hath
pleased your fure to mutiny within you, without disputing,
your Genealogies or taking knowledge whose branch you are,
the King will leave it to me,
and I dare make it mine: you have your answer.
If thou were sole inheritor to him
That made the world his,
And could see no Sun shine upon any thing but thine,
Were Pharamont as truly valiant as I feel him cold,
And ringd amongst the choicest ofhis friends: such
As would blush to talk such cerious follies,
Or back such belied commendations: and from his presence
Spit all those brags, you should hear further from me.
Sir, you wrong the Prince, I gave you not this freedom,
go to, be better tempered.
It must be sir, when I am nobliervsde.
Ladies, this would have bin a pattern of succession,
Had he never met this mischief: by my life this is
The worthiest: the true name of man this day within
My knowledge.
I cannot tell what you may call knowledge,
but i'msure tothers the man set in my eye,
Oh tic a Prince of wax.
A dog it is.
Phylaster, tell me the injuries you aim at in your riddles.
If you had my eyes sir and sufferance,
My grief upon you, and my broken fortunes,
My wants great, and now nothing hopes and fears,
My wrongs would make ill riddles to be laughed at:
Dare you be still my King, and right me.
Give me your wrongs in private.
He dares not stand the shock.
I cannot blame him, theres danger int.
Every man in this Age has a soul of Crystal, to read their actions, though men's faces are so far asunder, that they hold no intelli∣gence: but view the stranger well, and you shall see a fever throw all his braueries, and feel him shacke like a true truant, if hee give not back his Crown again, upon the report of an elder gun: I am no augery.
Go to, be more your self, as you respect our favour, you'll stir vs else: sir I must have you know, that you are, and shall be at our pleasure, what fashion we will put upon you, smooth your self, ore or by the gods
I am dead sir, you are my Fate, it was not I said I was wronged, I carry all about me, my weak stars lead me too: all my weak fortunes, who dare in all this presence speak, that is but man of flesh, and may bee mortal, tell me, I doe not most entirely love this Prince, and honour his full virtues.
Hes possessed.
Yes, with my fathers spirit is hear O king,
a dangerous spirit, and now he tells me king,
I was a kings Heir, bids me be a king, and whispers
to me, these are all my subjects, tic strange he will
not let me sleep: but dives into my fancy, and there
gives me shapes that kneel and doe me service,
cry me king, but i'll suppress him, heas a factious
spirit and will undo me: Noble sir your hand,
I am your servant.
Away I doe not like this,
I'll make you tamer, or i'll dispossess you both of your life &amp; spirit: for this time I pardon your wild speech, without so much as impri∣sonment.
I thank you sir, you dare not for the people.
Ladies what think you now of this brave fellow.
A pretty talking fellow hot at hand: but eye you stranger, is hee not a fine complete Gentleman? O these strangers, I doe af∣fact them strangely, they doe the rarest home things, and please the fullest, as I live I could love all their Nation over and over for his sake.
Gods comfort, your poor head-peece tic a weak one, and has need of an night-cap.
See how his fancy labours, has hee not spoke home and bravely, what a dangerous train did he give fire to, how hee shoke the King, made his soul melt within him, and his blood run into whey: it stood upon his brow like a cold winter dew.
Gentlemen, you have no suit to me, I am no minion, you stand me thinks, like men that would bee Courtiers, if you could well be flattered at a price not to undo your Children, you are al ho∣nest, go get you home again, and make your Country a virtuous Court, to which your great ones may, in their diseased age, retire live recluses.
How doe your worth sir.
Well, very well, and so well, that if the King please,
I may live many years.
Sir, the King must please:
Whilst we know who you are, and what you are, your wrongs and virtues shrink not worthy sir: but call your father to you, in whose name we will waken all the gods, and conjure up the rods of vengeance, the abused people, who like raging torrents shall swell hie: and so begirt the dens of these Male-dragons, that through the strongest safety they shall beg for mercy at your swords point.
Friend no more, our ears may be corrupted, tic an Age we dare not trust our wills to, doe you love me?
Doe we love heaven and honour?
My Lord Lyon you had a virtuous Gentlewoman
called you father, is she yet alive.
Most honoured sir she is, and for a penance but of an idle dream, has undertook a tedious pilgrimage.
I'st to me, or to any of these Gentlemen you come.
To you, brave Lord, the Princess would entreat your present company.
The Princess send for me, you are mistaken,
If you be called Phylaster, tic you.
Kiss her fair hand, and say I will attend her.
Doe you know what you doe?
Yes, go to see a woman.
But doe you way the danger you are in?
Danger in a sweet face: By Iubiter I must not fear a wo∣man.
But are you sure it was the Princess sent,
It may be some foul train to catch your life.
I dare not think it Gentlemen, shoe's noble, her eye may shoot me dead, or those true red and white fiend friends in her cheeks, may steal my soul out, there's all the danger int: but bee what may, her single name hath armed me.
Go on, and be as truly happy as thou art fearless:
Come Gentlemen, lets make our friends acquainted, lest the king prove false.
Comes he not.
Madame?
Will Phylaster come?
Dear Madame, you were wont to credit me at the first.
But did thou tell me so.
I am forgetful, and my women's strength is so ore charged, with dangers like to grow about my marriage, that these under things dares not abide in such a troubled sea, how looked hee when hee told thee he would come?
Why we ll.
And not a little fearful.
Fear Madame, sure he knows not what it is,
You all are of his faction, the whole Court is bold in praise of him, whilst I may live neglected, and doe noble things, as fools in strife throw gold into the sea, drowned in the doing: but I know he fears.
Madame, me thoughts his looks hid more of love then fear.
Of love, to whom: to you, did you deliver those plain words I sent, with such a wooing gesture and puicke looks that you have caught.
Madam I move to you.
Of love to me: alas, thy ignorance lets thee not see the cross∣ses of our births, nature that loves not to be questioned: why she did this, or that, but has his ends, and knows she dos well: no∣for gave the world to things so opposite, so bound to put as he and I am, if a boule of blood drawn from this arm, would poison thee, a draught ofhis would cure thee: love to me.
Madame, I think I hear him.
Bring him in: you gods that will not have your dens with. stood, whose holy wisdoms at this time it is to make the passions of a feeble maid, the way into your Justice, I obey.
Here is my Lord Phylaster.
Oh it is well, withdraw your self.
Madame, your messenger.
made me believe you wished to speak with me.
Tic true Phylaster, but the words are such I have to say,
and dos so ill become the mouth of woman,
that I wish them said, and yet am loath to speak them.
Have you known that I have ought detracted
from your worth: have I in person wronged you?
or have set my baser Instrumnts to throw disgrace
upon your virtues.
Never madame you.
Why then should you in such a public place,
Injury a Princess, and a scandal lay upon my fortunes,
found to be so great: calling a great part of my dowry in question.
Madame, this truth which I shall speakē, will be foolish: but for your fair virtuous self, I could afford my self to have no right to any thing you wished.
Phylaster, know I must enjoy these Kingdoms.
Madame both?
Both, or I do, by heaven I die Phylaster,
if I not calmly die enjoy them both,
I would doe much to save that noble life,
yet would be loath to have posterity find in our stories,
that Phylaster gave his right unto a Sceptre and a Crown,
to save a Ladies longing.
Nay then hear, I must and will have them, and more.
What more?
Or lose that little life the gods prepared,
to trouble this poor piece of earth with all.
Madame, what more?
Turn then away thy face.
No.
Doe.
I can endure it: turn away my face,
I never saw yet enemy that looked so dreadfully,
But that I thought my self as great a basilisk as he,
Or speak so horrible, but that I thought my tongue
Bore thunder underneath as much as his:
Nor beast that I could turn from, shall I then begin,
To fear sweet sounds, a women's tongue, whom I do love,
Say you would have my life, why I will give it you,
For it is of me a thing so loathed, and unto you that beg,
Of so poor use, that I shall make no price,
If youintreat, I will vnmouedly hear.
Yet for my sake a little bend thy looks.
I do.
Then know I must have them and thee.
And me!
Thy love, without which, all the land discovered yet, will serve me for no use, but to be buried in.
I'st possible.
With it, it were too little to bestow on thee, now though thy breath strike me dead, which know it may, I have unripped my breast.
Madam, you are too full of noble thoughts,
to lay a train for this contemned life,
which you might have for asking, to suspect were base, where I de∣serve no ill: love you by all my hopes, I doe aboue my life, but how this passion should proceed from you so violently, would amaze a man that would be Jealous.
Another soul into my body shot,
Could not have filled me with more strength and spirit,
Then this thy breath, but spend not hasty time
In seeking how I came thus: tic the gods that make me so,
And sure our love will be the worthier, and the better
Blessed, in that the secret justice of the gods
Is mingled with it: let vs leave, and kiss, lest some
Vnwelcom'd guest should fall betwixt vs,
And we should part without it.
T'will be ill I should abide here long.
Tic true, and worse you should come often.
How shall we devise to hold intelligence?
That our true loves, on an new occasion may agree,
What path is best to tread.
I have a boy, sent by the gods, I hope to this intent, not yet seen in the Court, hunting the buck I found him sitting by a foun∣taine side, of which he borrowed some, to quench his thirst, and paid the nymph as much again in tears: a Garland lay him by, made by himself, of many several flowers, bred in the veil, stuck in that mystic order that the rareness delighted me, but ever when he turned his tender eye upon um, he would weep as if he meant to make them grow again, seeing such pretty helpless innocence dwell in his face: I asked him all his story, he told me that his parents gentle dyed, leaving him to the mercy ofthe fields: which gave him roots, &amp; of the crystal springs, which did not stop the course, and the Sun, which still he thanked, it yielded him his life: then took hee up his garland, and did show what every flower, as country people hold, did signify, and how all ordered thus expressed his grief, and to my thoughts did read the pretiest lecture of his country art, that could be wished, so that me thoughts I could have studied it, I gladly enter∣taint him, whom was glad to follow: and have got the trustiest, lovingest, and the gentlest boy that ever moister kept, him will I send to wait on you and bear our hidden love.
Tic well, no more.
Madame, the Prince is come to doe his service.
What will you Phylaster doe with your self?
Why? that which all the gods have appointed out for me.
Dear, hide thy self, bring in the Prince.
Hide me from Pharamont:
When thunder speaks, which is the voice of God,
Though I doe reverence, yet I doe not hide my self,
And shall a stranger Prince have leave to brag
Unto a foreign Nation, that he made Phylaster
hide himself.
He cannot know it.
Though it should sleep for ever to the world,
it is a simple sin to hide my self, which will for ever
on my conscience lie.
Then good Phylaster give him scope and way
in what he says: for he is apt to speak
what you are loath to hear.
I will.
My Princely Mistress, as true lovers ought,
I come to kiss these fair hands, &amp; to show in outward ceremonies,
the dear love within my heart.
IfI shall have an answer or no, directly I am gone.
To what? what would he have answer?
To his claim unto the Kingdom.
Sira, I forbore you before the King.
Good sir doe so still, I would not talk with you.
But now the time is fitter, doe but offer to make mention of right to any kingdom, though it lie scarce habitable.
Good sir let me go.
And by the gods
Peace Pharamont, if then
Leave vs Phylaster.
I have done.
You shall not need.
What now?
Know Pharamont I loath to brawl with such a blast as thou, who are nothing but a valiant voice, but if thou shalt provoke me further, men shall say thou were, and not lament it.
Doe you slight my greatness so much,
and in the chamber ofthe Princess?
It is a place to which I must confess, I owe a reverence, but were the Church at the high Altar, there's no place so safe, where thou darstiniurie me, but I dare kill thee: and for your greatness, know I can grasp you and your greatness, thus, thus, into nothing: give not a word, not a word back, farewell.
It is an odd fellow Madame, wee must stop his mouth with some office when we are married.
You were best make him your Controller.
I think he would discharge it well.
Madame, I hope our hearts are knit, but yet so slow, the ceremonies ofstate are, that twill bee long before our hearts bee so, then if you please being agreed in heart, let vs not waite for dreaming form, but take a little stolen delights, and so prevent our joys to come.
If you dare speak your thoughts, I must with-draw in honour.
The constitution ofmy body will never hold out
till the wedding, I must seek else where.
And thou shalt find her honourable, boy full of regard
Unto thy tender youth, for thy own modesty,
And for my sake, apter to give, then thou wilt be to ask,
I or deserve.
Sir, you did take me up when I was nothing,
And I am only yet some thing, by being yours,
You trusted me unknown: and that which you were apt to con∣ster: a simple innocence in me: perhaps might have been crafty: The cunning of a boy hardened in lies: and theft: yet ventured you to part my miseries and me: For which I never can expect to serve a Lady: that bears more honour in her breast then you.
But boy, it will prefer thee, thou art young,
And bear a childish ouer-flowing love, to them that claps thy cheeks, and speak thee fair: but when judgment comes no rule those passions, thou wilt remember best those careful friends, that pla'st thee in the noblest way of life: she is a Princess I prefer thee to.
In that small time that I have seen the world,
I never knew a man hasty to part with a servant he thought trusty. I remember my father would prefer the boys he kept to gre∣la men then he, but did it not till they were too saucy for him∣self.
Why gentle boy? I find no fault at all
In thy behaviour.
Sir, if I have made a fault ofignorance,
Instruct my youth, I shall be willing: if not apt to learn,
Age and experience will adorn my mind with larger
Knowledge, and if I have done a wilful fault
Think me not past all hope: for once
What moister holds so strict a hand over his boy,
That he will part with him without one warning,
Let me be corrected, to break my stubbornenesse,
If it be so, rather then turn me off,
And I shall mend.
Thy love dos plead so prettily to stay,
That trust me I could weep to part with thee:
Alas, I do not turn thee off: thou know it is my business
That dos call thee hence, and when thou art with her,
Thou dwest with me, think so, and tic so, and when time is full
That thou hast well discharged this heavy trust,
Laid on so weak a one: I will again with joy,
Receive thee, as I live I will, nay, weep
Not, gentle boy, tic more then time thou did attend the Princess.
I am gone, but since I am to part with you my Lord, and none knows whether I shall live to doe more service for you, take this little prayer: Heaven bless your loves, your sighs, all your designs, may sick men if they have your wish, be well, and heavens hate those you curse, though I be one.
The love of boys unto their Lords is strange, I have read wonders ofit: yet this boy for my sake, if a man may judge by looks and speech, would out doe story. I must see a day to pay him for his loyalty.
Why should these Ladies stay so long, they must
Come this way, I know the Queen employs um not,
For the reverend mother sent me word,
They would all be for the garden: if they should all
Prove honest now, I were in a fair taking:
I was never so long without sport before in my life,
And in my conscience tic not my fault.
Oh for our country Ladies, here's one bolted,
I'll hound at her. Madame.
Your grace.
Shall I not be a trouble?
Not to me sir.
Nay, nay, you're too quick by this sweet hand.
You'll bee forsworn sir, tic an old glove, if you will talk at distance I am for you, but good Prince be not bawdy, nor doe not brag, those two I only bar, and then I think I shall have sense e∣nough to answer all the weighty Apophthegms your royal blood shall manage.
Dear Lady, can you love?
Dear Prince, how dear? I ne'er cost you a Couch yet, nor put you to the dear repentance of a play and a banquet, here's no Scarlet sir, to make you blush, this is my own hair, and this face has bin so far from being dear to any, that it ne'er cost a penny painting, and for the rest ofmy poor wardrobe such as you see, it leaves no hand behind it, to make the jealous silke-mans wife curse our doing.
You much mistake me Lady.
Lord I doe so, would you or I could help it.
You're very dangerous bitter, like a potion.
No sir, I do not mean to purge you, though I mean to purge a little time on you.
Do Ladies of this Country use to give no more respect to men of my full being.
Full being, I understand you not, unless your grace
Means growing to fatness: and then your only remedy
Upon my knowledge Prince, is in a morning,
A cup of neat white wine, brewd with Cardus,
Then fast till supper, about five you may eat, use exercise,
And keep a sparrow hawk, you can shoot in a Tiller,
But of all, your grace must fly Flebotamie,
Fresh pork and Conger, and clarified whey:
They are dullers ofthe vital animals.
Lady you talk of nothing all this time.
Tic very true sir, I talk ofyou.
This is a crafty wench, I like her wit well,
Twill be rare to stir up a leaden appetite,
Shoe's dainty, and must be courted with a shower of gold,
Madame look here, all these and more, then —
What ha you there my Lord, gold? now as I live tic fair gold, you'd have silver fort, to play with the Pages, you could not have ta∣ken me in a worse time sir, but ifyou have present use my Lord, I'll send my man with silver, and keep your gold safe for you.
Lady, Lady.
Shes coming sir behind,
Will ye take white money yet for all this.
If there be but two such in this Kingdom more, and near the Court, we may en hang up our harps, ten such Camphor Con∣stitutions as this would call the golden age again in question, and teach the old way for every ill fast husband, to get his own i will∣drone, and what a mischief that would breed, let all consider.
Heres's another, ifshe be of the same last, the devil shall pluck her
on: Many fair mornings Lady.
As many mornings, bring as many days,
fair, sweet, and hopeful to your grace.
She gives good words yet, sure this wench is free.
Ifyour more cerious business doe not call you Lady,
Let me hold quarter with you, we'll talk an hour
Ont quickly.
What would your grace talk of?
Ofsome such pretty subject as your self,
I'll go no further then your eye, your lip, theres time enough
For one man for an Age.
Sir, they stand right, and my lips are yet even smooth,
Young enough, ripe enough, and red enough,
Or my glass wrongs me.
O they are two twinned Cherries died in blush,
Which those fair suns aboue with their deep beams
Reflect upon, and ripen, sweetest beauty;
Bow down those branches, that the longing taste
Of the sweet looker on, may meet these blessings,
And taste and live.
O delicate sweet Prince, she that hath snow enough about her heart, to take the wanton spring of ten such lines, it may bee a number without Probatum. Sir, you have by such neat Poetry gathered a kiss, that if I had but five lines of that number, such pretty begging blanks: I should commend your forehead, or your cheeks, and kiss you too.
Doe it in prose;
you cannot miss it Madame.
I shall, I shall.
By my life but you shall not,
I'll prompt you first,
Can you doe it now?
Me thinks tic easy now you ha don't before me,
and yet I should stick at it.
Stick till to morrow, isle never part you sweetest,
but we lose time. Can you love me?
Love you my Lord 〈…〉 ye?
I'll teach you in a short sentence,
Cause I will not load your memory,
This is all: Love me and lie with me.
Was it lie with you, that you said, tic impossible.
Not to a willing mind, that will endeavour,
If I doe not teach you to doe it as easily in one night,
As you'll go to bed: I'll lose my royal blood for it.
Why Prince you have a Lady of your own,
that yet wants teaching.
I'll sooner teach a mare the old measures,
Then teach her any thing belonging to the function,
Shoe's afraid to lie with her self,
If she have but my mescaline imagination about her,
I know when we are married, I must ravish her.
By my honour thats a foul fault indeed,
But time and your good help will wear it out sir.
And for my other I see excepting your dear self,
dearest Lady I had rather be Sir Timen a schoolmaster,
and keep a darie maid.
Has your grace seen the Court star Gallatea.
Out upon her, shees as cold ofher favour,
as an appaplex: she sailed by but now.
How do you hold her wit?
I hold her wit, the strength of all the guard
Cannot hold it, if they were tied toot:
She would blow um out ofthe kingdom: they talk of Iubiter,
Hes but a squib-cracker to her, but speak sweet Lady,
Shall I be freely welcome?
Whether?
To your bed, ifyou mistrust my faith, you doe me the most vnnoblest wrong.
I dare not Prince.
Make your own conditions, my purse shall seal um,
and what you dare imagine you can want,
i'll furnish you withal, give worship to you thoughts
every morning about it, come I know you're bashful,
speak in my ear, will you be mine: keep this, and with
it me, soon I shall visit you.
My Lord, my chamber's most uncertain, but when tic night i'll find some means to slip into your lodging, till when
Till when, this and my heart go with thee.
Oh thou pernicious petticoat Prince, are these your virtues, well, if I doe not iay a train to blow your sport up, I am no woman, and Lady Dowsabell, i'll fit you for it.
Whore's the boy?
Within.
Gave you him gold to buy him clothes?
I did.
And has he don't?
Yes Madam.
Tic a pretty sad talking boy, i'st not, asked you his name?
No Madame.
O, you are welcome, what good news?
As good as any one can tell your grace,
that says, she has done that you would have wished.
Hast thou discovered?
I have strained a point of modesty for you.
I prithee how?
In listening after bawdry: I see, let a Lady live never so mo∣destly, they shall be sure to find a lawful time, to harken after bow∣dry, your Prince brave Pharamont was so hot ont.
With whom?
Why with the Lady I suspected, I can tell the time and place.
O when and where?
To night, his lodging.
Run thy self into the presents: mingle there again with other Ladies, leave the rest to me, if destiny to whom wee dare not say, why thou did this, have not decreed it so, in lasting leaves: whose smallest characters was never altered, yet this match shall break: wheres the boy.
Here Madame.
Sir, your sad to change your service, i'st not so?
Madame, I have not changed, I waite on you to doe him ser∣vice.
Then trust in me, tell me thy name.
Bellario.
Thou can sing and play.
If grief will give me leave Madame, I can.
Alas, what kind of grief can thy years know,
Had thou a cross schoolmaster when thou went to school?
Thou art not capable of other grief,
Thy brows and cheeks are smooth as water be,
When no breath troubles them: believe me boy,
Care seeks wrinkled brows, and hollow eyes,
And builds it self caves to abide in them,
Come sir, tell me truly, doth your Lord love me?
I know not Madame, what it is.
Can thou know grief, and never yet knew love,
Thou art deceiud boy, dos he speak of me,
As ifhe wished me well?
If it be love to forget all respect to his own friends, with thinking of your face: if it bee love to sit cross armed, and think away the day, with mingling starts, and crying your name as load as men in streets doe fire: if it bee love to weep himself away, when hee but hears of any woman dead or kilt, because it might have bin your chance: ifwhen hee goes to rest, which will not bee, twixt every praierhe says, to name you once as others drop beads, be to be in love, then Madame I dare swear he loves ye.
O you're a cunning boy, and taught to your Lords credit,
But thou know a lie that bears this sound,
Is welcomer to me then any truth that says
He loves me not: lead the way boy, doe you attend me too,
Tic thy Lords business hastes me thus away.
Come Ladies, shall we talk a round, as men do walk a mile,
women should talk an hour after supper, tic their exercise.
Tislate.
Tic all my eyes will doe to lead me to my bed.
I fear their so heavy you'll scarce find the way to your own lodging with um to night.
The Prince.
Not abed Ladies, yare good sitters up, what think you of a pleasing dream to last till morning?
I shall chose my Lord a pleasing wake before it.
Tic well yare courting ofthese Ladies,
i'st not late Gentlemen?
Yes madame.
Waite you there.
Shoe's jealous as I live, look my Lord,
the Princess a Hilus an Atones,
His form is angel-like.
Why this is that, must when you are wed sit by
Your pillow, like young Appollo, with his hand
and voice, binding your thoughts in sleep, the Princess
dos provide him for you, and for her self.
I find no music in these boys.
Nor I, they can doe little, and that small they doe,
they have not wit to hide it.
Serves he the Princess?
Yes.
Tic a sweet boy, how brave she keeps him.
Ladies all good rest, I mean to kill a buck,
tomorrow morning, ere you have done your dreams.
All happiness attend your grace,
Gentlemen good rest, shall we to bed?
Yes, all good night.
May your dreams be true to you,
What shall we doe Gallants? tic late.
The king is up still, see he comes,
a guard along with him.
Look your intelligence be true.
Ypon my life it is, and I doe hope your Highness will not tie me to a man, that in the heate of wooing, throws me off, and takes another.
What should this mean?
If it be true, that Lady had been better embraced cureless disea∣ses: get you to your rest, you shall be righted: Gentlemen draw near, we shall employ ye.
Is young Pharamont come to his lodging?
I saw him enter there.
Haste some of you, and cunningly discover,
if Meagre be in her lodging.
Sir she parted hence but now with other Ladies.
If she bee there, we shall not need to make a vain disco∣very of our suspicion, you gods I see, that who vnrighteously holds wealth or state from others, shall be cursed in that which meaner men are blessed withal: Ages to come, shall know no male of him, left to inherit, and his name shall be blotted from the earth, ifhee have any child, it shall be crossly matched, the gods themselves shall sow wild strife betwixt her Lord and her: yet if it be your wills forgive the sin I have committed, let it not fall upon this undeserving child, if she has not broke your laws, but how could I look to be heard of gods, that must be just, praying upon the ground, I hold in wrong.
Sir I have asked, and her women swear she is within, but they I think are bawds, I told um I must speak with her, they laughed, and said their Lady lay speechless: I said my business was important, they said their Lady was about it: I grew hot, and cri∣ed, my business was a matter that concerned life and death, they answered so was sleeping, at which their Lady was: I urged again she had scarce time to bee so, since last I saw her, they smiled again, and seemed to instruct me, that sleeping was nothing
but lying down and winking, answers more direct, I could not get from them, in short sir, shoe's not there.
Tic then no time to dally, you a'the guard, wait at the back∣door of the Princes lodging, and see that none pass thence upon your lives: Knock Gentlemen, knock load, what has your plea∣sure taken off your hearing: I'll break your meditation, knock a∣gain, and louder, not yet, I do not think he sleeps, having such la∣rums by him, once more, Pharamont.
What saucy groom knocks at this dead of night, where be our waiters, by my vexed soul he meets his death, that meets me for this boldness.
Prince, Prince, you wrong your thoughts, wee are your friends, come down.
The king?
The same sir.
Come down sir, we have cause of present counsel with you,
If your grace please to use me, i'll attend you to your chamber.
No, tic too late Prince, i'll make bold with yours.
I have certain private reasons to my self sir,
Makes me unmannerly, and say you cannot:
Nay, press not forward, he must come through my life,
That comes here.
Sir be resolved, I must come, and will come enter.
I will not be dishonoured thus, hee that enters, enters upon his death, sir tic a sign you make no stranger of me, to bring these runagates to my chamber, at these unseasoned hours.
Why, do you chafe your self: you are not wronged,
Nor shall be: only search your lodging,
For some cause to our self, Enter I say.
I so no.
Let um enter Prince, let um enter, I am up,
I know their business, tic a poor breaking of a Ladies honour, they hunt so hotly after, let um enjoy it, you have your business Gentlemen, I lay here, O my Lord the King, this is not noble in you,
To make public the weakness of a woman.
Come down.
I dare my Lord, your whoting and your clamours, your pri∣uate whispers, and your broad fleerings, can no more vex my soul, then this base carriage: but I have vengeance still in store for some, shall in the most contempt you can have ofmee, bee joy and nourish∣meant.
Will you come down?
Yes, to laugh at your worst, but I shall wring you, if my skill fail me not.
Sir, I must chide you dearly for this looseness,
You have wronged a Lady, but no more,
Conduct him to his lodging, and to bed.
Get him another wench, and you bring him to bed indeed.
Tic strange a man cannot ride a Stage or two,
To breath himself, without a warrant: if this gear hold,
That lodgings be searched thus, pray God we may lye
With our own wives in safety, that they be not
by some trick of state mistaken.
Now Lady ofhonour, whore's your honour now?
No man can fit your palate but the Prince,
Thou most ill shrouded rottenness, thou piece
Made by a Painter and Apothecaries, thou troubled sea of lust,
Thou wilderness inhabited by wild thoughts,
Thou swollen cloud of infection, thou ripe mine of all diseases,
Thou all sin and hell, and last all devils, tell me,
Had you none to pull on with your courtesies,
But he that must be mine, and wrong my daughter:
By all the gods: all these, all the Pages, and all the Court
Shall whoote thee through the Court, fling rotten oranges:
Make rebel rymes, and sear thy name with candles
Upon walls, doe you laugh Lady Venus?
Faith sir you must pardon me, I cannot choose but laugh,
To see you merry, if you do this O King;
Nay, if you dare do it, by all those gods you swore by,
And as many more of my own, I will have fellows,
And such fellows in it, that shall make noble mirth:
The Princess your dear daughter shall stand by me,
Upon walls, and sung in ballads, or any thing, urge me no more,
I know her and her haunts, her fair leaps
And out-lying, and will discover all, and will dishonour her,
I know the boy she keeps, a handsome boy, about eighteen,
Knows what she dos with him, where, when;
Come sir, you put me to a women's madness,
The glory of a fury, and if I doe not doe it to the height —
What boy is that she raves at?
Alas good minded Prince, you know not these things,
I am loath to reveal um: keep this fault
As you would keep your health from the hot ayre
Of the corrupted people, or by heaven,
I will not sink alone, what I have known,
Shall be as public as in Print, all tongues shall speak it,
As they doe the language they're borne in, as free and commonly,
I'll set it like a prodigious star, for all to gaze at,
And so high and glowing, that other kingdoms far and foreign,
Shall read it there, travail with it, till they find no tongue,
To make it more, nor no more people,
And then behold the fall of your fair Princess.
Has she a boy?
So please your grace I have seen a boy waite on her, a fair boy.
Go get you to your quarters,
for this time, i'll study to forget you.
Do so, and i'll forget your —
Heere's a male spirit fit for Hercules.
if ever there be nine worthy of women, this wench shall ride aside and be their Captain.
Sure she has a Garrison of devils in her tongue,
She uttered such balls of wild fire, she has so nettled the King,
That all the Doctors in the Country will not cure him,
That boy was a strange found out antidote to cure her infections;
That boy, that Princess boy, that chaste, brave,
virtuous Ladies boy, and a fair boy, a wel-spoken boy,
All these considered can make nothing else,
But there I leave ye Gentlemen.
Nay, we'll go wander with you.
And doubtless tic true.
I and tic the gods
That raised this punishment to scourge the King
With his own issue, is it not a shame for all vs,
That write noble in the Land for vs, that should be freemen,
To behold a man that is the bravery ofhis age,
Phylaster: pressed down from his royal right,
By this regardless King, and only look and see the Sceptre
Ready to be cast into the hands of that lascivious Lady,
That lives in lust with a smooth boy,
Now to be married to you strange thing,
Who but that people please to let him be a Prince,
Is borne a slave, in that which should be his most noble part,
His mind.
That man that would not stir with you to aide Phylaster,
Let the gods forget that such a Creature
Walks upon the earth.
The gentry do await it, and the people
against their nature, are all for him, and like a field if standing corn,
moved with a stiff gale: their heads bow al one way,
The only cause that draws Phylaster back,
From this attempt, is the fair Princess love,
Which he admires, and we can now comfort.
Perhaps he will not believe.
Why Gentlemen, tic without question so.
I tic past speech she lives dishonestly,
But how shall we: if he be curious, work
on his belief.
We all are satisfied within our selves.
Since it is true, and Lords to his own good,
I'll make this new report to be my knowledge,
I'll say I know it, i'll swear I saw it,
It will be best.
Twill move him.
Here he comes. Good morrow to your honour:
We have spent some time in seeking you.
My worthy friends, you that can keep your memories, to know your friend in miseries, and cannot frame on men disgrace for virtue, a good day attend you all, what service may I doe worthy your acceptance.
My Lord, wee come to urge that virtue which wee know
lives in your breast: forth, rise, make a head,
the nobles and the people are all dull with this usurping king,
and not a man that ever heard the word,
knows such a thing as virtue, but will second your attempts,
How honourable is this love in you to me,
That have deserved more, know my friends,
You that were borne to shame your poor Phylaster,
With too much curtsy, I could afford to melt my self
To thanks, but my designs are not yet ripe sufficient,
That ere long I shall employ your loves,
But yet the time is short of what I would.
The time is fuller then you expect,
That which hereafter perhaps be reached by violence,
May now be caught, as for the King you know
The people long have hated bim, but now
The Princess whom they loved.
Why, what ofher?
Is loathed as much as he.
By what strange means?
Shoe's known a whore.
Thou lie!
My Lord —
Thou least, and thou shalt feel it, I had thought,
Thy mind had been of honour, then to rob a Lady
Of her good name, is an infectious sin, not to be pardoned,
Be it false as hell, twill never be redeemd,
If it be sown amongst the people, faithful to increase,
All evil they shall he are. Let me alone, that I
May cut out falsehood where it grows, set hills on hills,
Betwixt me and that man that utters this, and I will scale them all,
And from the utmost top fall on his neck,
like thunder from a cloud.
This is most strange, sure he dos love her.
I doe love fair truth, she is my mistress, &amp; who injuries her, draws vengeance from me. Sirs, let go my arms.
Nay, good my Lord be patient.
Sir, remember this is your honoured friend, that comes to doe his service, and will show you why he uttered this.
I ask your pardon sir,
My zeal to truth makes me unmannerly,
Should I have heard dishonour spoke ofyou, behind your backs, un∣truly, I had been as much distempered and enraged, as now.
But this my Lord, is truth.
Oh say not so,
Good sir forbear to say so, tic then truth that women all are false, urge itno more, tic impossible, why should you think the Princess light?
Why she was taken at it.
Tic false, by heaven tic false, it cannot be,
Can it, speak Gentlemen? Can women all be damned?
Why then it cannot be.
And she was taken with her boy.
What boy?
A Page, a boy that serves her.
Oh good gods, a little boy.
I, know you him my Lord?
Hell and sin know him: Sir you are deceived,
I'll reason it a little milder with you,
If she were lustful, would she take a boy that knows not yet de∣sires,
she would have one should meet her thoughts, and know the sin sh e acts, which is the great delight of wickedness, you are abused, and so is she and I.
How, you my Lord?
Why all the worlds abused, in an unjust report.
O noble sir, your virtues cannot look
Into the subtle thoughts of women. In short my Lord,
I too ke them, I my self.
Now all the devils thou did, fly from my rage,
Would thou had tan devils engendering plagues,
When thou did take them: hide thee from mine eyes,
Would thou had taken daggers in thy breast,
When thou did take them,
Or been stuacke dumb for ever, that this fault
might have slept in silence.
Have you known him so ill tempered?
Never before.
The winds that are let loose from the four corners
Of the earth, and spreads them self all over sea and land,
Meets not a fair on, what friend bears a sword,
To run me thorough?
Why my Lord, are you so moved at this?
When any fall from virtue I am distracted,
I have interest in it.
But good my Lord recall your self,
and think what's best to be done,
I thank you, I will do it,
Please you to leave me I'll consider of it,
To morrow i'll find your lodgings, and give you answer.
All the gods direct you the readiest way.
I had forgot to ask um where he took her,
I'll follow him. Oh that I had a sea within my breast,
To quench the fire I feel, more circumstances
Would but flame this fire: it more afflicts me now,
To know by whom the deed is done, then simply,
That it is done, and he that tells me this, is honourable,
As far from lies, as she is far from truth,
O that like beasts we could not grieve our selves
With that we see not, bulls and rams will fight,
To keep their females standing in their sight,
But take them from them, and you take at once
Their spleens away, and they will fall again
Unto their pastures, growing fresh and fat,
And taste the waters ofthe springs as sweet as it was before.
Finding no start in sleep, but miserable man,
See, see, you gods he walks still, and the face you let him wear
When he was innocent, is still the same, not blush.
Is this justice? do you mean to entrap mortality,
That you allow treason so smooth a brow:
I cannot now think he is guilty.
Health to you my Lord:
The Princess doth commend her love, her life,
and this unto you.
O Bellario, now I perceive she loves me,
She dos show it in loving thee my boy,
She has made thee brave.
My Lord, she has attired me past wish,
Past my desert, more fit for her attendant,
But far unfit for me that doe attend.
Thou art grown Courtly my boy.
O let all women that love black deeds, learn to dissemble here,
Here, with this paper, she dos write to me
As if her heart were twines of Adamant
To all the world besides, but unto me a maiden snow,
That melted with my looks: tell me my boy,
How dos the Princess use thee?
Scarce like her servant, but as if I were
Something allied to her, or had preserved her life
Three times by my fidelity: as mothers fond,
Doe use their only sons, as I'd use one that's left unto my trust,
For whom my life should pay,
If he meet harm: so she dos use me.
Why tic wondrous well,
But what kind language dos she feed thee with?
Why she dos tell me she will trust my youth with al her my∣den store, and dos call me her pretty servant, bids me weep no more for leaving you, she'll see my service rewarded, &amp; such words of that soft strain, that I am nearer weeping when she ends, then ere she speaks.
This is much better still.
Are you not well my Lord?
Ill, no Bellario.
Me thinks your words fall out from your tongue, so uneven∣lie, nor is there in your looks that quickness that I was wont to see.
Thou art deceived boy. And she strokes thy head.
Yes.
And she dos clap thy cheeks.
She dos my Lord.
And she dos kiss thee boy, ha.
How my Lord?
She kisses thee.
Never my Lord, by heaven.
That's strange, I know she dos.
No by my life.
Why then she dos not love me,
Come she dos, I bid her do it: I charged her by all charms of love between vs, by the hope of peace wee should enjoy, to yield thee all delight, naked as to her Lord. I took her oath thou should in∣joy her. Tell me gentle boy, is she not paradise: is not her breath sweet as Arabian winds when fruits are ripe, are not her breasts two lickquid Ivory balls? is she not all a lasting mine of joy?
Yes, now I see why my discurled thoughts were so perplexed. When first I went to her my heart held augeries: you are abused, some villain has abused you, I doe see where you tend. Fall rocks upon his head, that put this to you, tic some subtle train to bring that noble friend of yours to nought.
Thou think I will bee angry with thee, come thou shalt know all my drift. I hate her more then I love happiness, and placed thee there to pry with sparrows eyes, into her deeds, hast thou
discovered, is she fallen to lust, as I would wish her, speak some comfort to me.
My Lord you did mistake the boy you sent,
Had she the lust of sparrows and of goats,
Had she a sin that weighed from the world, beyond the name oflust,
I would not aide her base desires,
But what I come to know as servant to her,
I would not reveal, to make my life last ages.
Oh my heart!
This is a salve worse then the maine deceit,
Tell me thy thoughts, for I will know the least
That dwells within thee, or will rip thy heart,
To know it, I will see thy thoughts as plain,
As I doe now thy face.
Why so you doe: she is for ought I know, by all the gods,
As chaste as ice: but were she foul as hell,
And I did know it thus, the breath of Kings,
The points ofswords, tortures, nor bulls of brass,
Should wrack it from me.
Then tic no time to dally with thee, I will take thy life,
For I doe hate thee, I could curse thee now.
Ifyou do hate me, you could not curse me worse,
The gods have not a punishment in store,
To me, then is your hate.
Fie, fie, so young and so dissembling, tell me when &amp; where,
Thou did enjoy her, or let plagues fall upon me,
If I destroy thee not.
By heaven I never did, and when I lie to save my life,
May I live long and loathed, hew me asunder,
And whilst I can think, i'll love those pieces you have cut away
Better then those that grow, and kiss those limbs
Because you made um so.
Fear thou not death, can boys contemn that.
Oh! what boy is he could be content to live
To be a man, that sees the best of men thus passionate,
Thus without reason.
O thou dost not know what tic to die.
Yes, I doe know my Lord tic less then to be borne,
A lasting sleep, a quiet resting from all jealousy,
A thing we all pursue: I know besides, it is but giving ore again,
That must be lost.
But there are pains false boy,
For perjured, souls: think but those, and then thy heart will melt,
And then thou wilt utter all.
May they fall all upon me, whilst I live,
If I be perjured, or have ever thought of that you charge me with,
If I be false, send me to suffer in those punishments you speak of Kill me.
Oh! What should I doe, why who can but believe him?
Hee dos swear so earnestly, that if it were not true, the gods would not endure him. Rise Bellario, thy protestaions are so deep, and thou dost look so truly when thou vtterest them, that though I knew um false, as were my hopes, I cannot urge thee further, but thou were too blame to iniuie me: for I must love thy honest looks, and take no revenge upon thy honest looks: a love from me to thee is firm, what ere thou dost, it troubles me, that I have called thy blood out of thy cheeks, that did so well become thee: But good boy let me not see thee more, something is done, that will distract me, that will make me mad, if I behold thee, if thou tenderest me, let me not see thee.
I will fly as far,
As there is morning, ere I give distaste to that most honoured frame, but through these tears shed at my haplesse parting, I can see a world of treason practised upon you, and her, and me, farewell for e∣uermore, if you shall hear that sorrows struck me dead, and after find me loyal, let there be a tear shed from you, in my memory, and I shall rest at peace.
Blessing be with thee what ere thou deserve.
O where shall I go bathe this body, nature too unkind,
That made no medicine to a troubled mind.
I marvel my boy comes not back,
But that I know my love will question him over and over,
How I slept, make talk how I remember him,
When his dear name was last spoken,
And how spoke when I sight song, and ten thousand such,
I should be angry at his stay.
What, in your meditations, who attends you?
None but my single self, I need no guard,
I doe no wrong, nor fear none.
Tell me, have you not a boy?
Yes Sir.
What kind of boy?
A page, a waiting boy.
A handsome boy?
I think he be not ugly Sir, well
qualified, and dutiful, I know him,
I took him not for beauty.
He speaks, and sings, and plays?
Yes Sir.
About eighteen?
I never asked his age.
Is he full of service?
By your pardon, why do you ask?
Put him away.
Sir.
Put him away I say, has done you that good service,
Shames me to speak off.
Good sir, let me understand you?
Ifyou fear me, show it in duty? put away that boy.
Let me have reason for it, and then your will is a command.
Do not you blush to ask it, cast him off:
ore shall do that shame to you, ye are one shame with me,
And so near my self, that by the gods,
I'd dare not tell my self, what you my self,
Have done.
What I have done?
Tic a new language, that allloue to learn:
The common people speak it well already,
They need no grammar: understand me well, there be foul
Whispers stirring, cast him off, and suddenly do it, farewell.
Where may a maid live securely free,
Keeping her honour fair, not with the living,
They feed upon opinions, errors, dreams, and make um truth,
They draw a nourishment out of defamings,
Grow upon disgraces, and when they see a virtue fortified,
Strongly aboue the battery of their tongues.
Oh how they mind to sink it, and defeated foul
Sick with poison, struck the mountains,
Where noble names be sleeping, till they sweat,
And the cold Marble melt.
Peace to your fairest thoughts, dearest mistress.
Oh my dearest servant,
I have a war within me.
He must be more then man that makes these christals run into rivers, sweetest fair the cause, and as I am your slave, tied to your goodness, your creature made again from what I was, and newly spirited, I'll right your honour.
O my best love, thatboy.
What boy?
The pretic boy you gave me,
What of him?
Must be no more mine.
Why?
They are jealous of him.
Jealous, who?
The King.
Oh my misfortune,
Then tic no idle jealousy, let him go.
O cruel, are you hard hearted too?
Who shall now tell you how much I loved you?
Who shall swear it to you, and weep the tears I send?
Who shall now bring you letters, rings, braslets,
Loose his health in service, make tedious nights,
In stories ofyour praise? Who shall now sing
Your crying Elegies, and strike a sad soul
Into senseless pictures, and make them warm?
Who shall take up his lute, and touch it,
Till he crown a silent sleep upon my eye-lids,
Make me dream and cry:
O my dear, dear Phylaster.
O my heart, would he had broken thee,
That made thee know this Lady was not loyal.
Mistress forget the boy, I'll get you a far better.
Oh never, never, such a boy again, as my Bellario.
Tic but your fond affection.
With thee, my boy, fare well for ever,
All service in servants, farewell faith and all
Desires to doe well, for thy sake, let all that
Shall succeed thee, for thy wrongs,
Sell and betray chaste love.
And all this passion for a boy.
He was your boy, and you put him unto me,
And the loss ofsuch must have a mourning for.
O thou forgetful woman.
How, my Lord?
False Arethusa.
Hast thou a medicine to restore my wits,
When I have lost um, if not,
leave to talk, and doe thus.
Doe what sir, would you sleep?
For ever Arethusa, O ye gods, ye gods:
Give me a wealthy patience, have I stood naked
Aboue the shock of many fortunes? have I seen mischief,
Numberless, and mighty, grow like a sea upon me:
Have I taken danger as deep as death, into my bosom,
And laughed upon it, made it but a mirth,
And flowing it by, do I live now like him under this tyrant King,
That languishing hear his sad bell, and sees his Mourners,
Doe I bear all this bravely? and sink at length
Under a women's falsehood, O that boy, that cursed boy,
None but a villain boy, to ease your lust.
Nay, then I am betrayed,
I feel the plot cast for my overthrow:
O I am wretched.
Now you may take that little right I have to this
Poor Kingdom, give it to your Joy, for I have no joy in it:
Some far place, where never woman kind durst set her foot,
For bursting with her poison must I seek,
And live to curse you, and there dig a Cave,
And preach to beasts and birds, what women are;
How Heaven is in your eyes, but in your hearts more hell,
Then hell has: How your tongues, like Scorpions,
Both heal and poison: How your thoughts woven,
With thousand changes in one subtle web, and worn by you:
How that foolish men that read the story of a women's face,
And dyes believing it is lost for ever: How all the good you have,
Is but a shadow, in the morning with you, and at night behind you,
Past and forgotten: How your vows are frost fast, for a night,
And with the next Sun gone; How you are,
Being taken altogether.
A mere confusion, and so dead a Chaios,
That love cannot distinguish these sad texts,
Till my last hour I am bound to utter of you,
So farewell all my wo, all my delight.
Be merciful you gods, and strike me dead.
What way have I deserved this? make my breast transparent,
That the world jealous of me,
May see the foulest thought my heart holds:
Where shall women turn their eyes to find out constancy?
Save me, how black and vile me thinks, that boy looks now!
Oh thou dissembler, that before thou spokst,
Were in thy cradle false, sent to make lies,
And to betray innocence, thy Lord and thou
Moist glory in the ashes of a maid, foold by her passion:
But the conquest is nothing so great as wicked,
Fly away, let my command force thee to that,
Which shame would doe without it, if thou vnderstoodst.
The loathed office thou hast undertook,
Why thou would hide thee under heaps of hills,
Lest we should dig and find thee.
O what god angry with me, hath sent this strange desease
Into the noblest minds, Madame this grief you add unto me,
Is no more then drops to seas, for which they are not seen to swell,
My Lord has struck his anger through my heart,
And let out all the hope of future joys,
Ye need not bid me fly, I came to part,
To take my latest leave,
Farewell for ever.
I durst not run away in honesty from such a Lady,
Like a boy that stole, or made some greater fault,
The power of gods assist you in your suffering:
Hasty time reveal the truth to your abused Lord, and mine,
That he may know your worth, whilst I go seek
Out some forgotten place to die.
Peace guide thee, thou hast overthrown me once,
But if I had another time to lose,
Thou, or another villain with thy looks,
Might take me out ofit, and send me naked,
My hair desheueld, through the fiery streets.
Madame, the king would hunt,
And calls for you with earnestness.
I am in tune to hunt: Diana if thou can
Rage with a maid, as with a man, let me discover thee
bathing, and turn me to a fearful hind,
That I may die pursued by cruel hounds,
And have my story written in my wounds.
What, are the hounds before, and all the Woodmen?
Our horses ready, and our bows bent?
All sir.
You are cloudy sir. Come we have forgotten your venial trespasses, let not that sit heavy upon your spirit,
Here is none dares utter it.
He looks like an old surfeited stallion after his leaping, Dull as a Dormouse: see how he sinckes, the wench has shot him between wind and water, and I hope sprung a lake.
He needs no teaching, he strikes sure enough,
His greatest fault is, he hunts too much in the purlewes,
Would he would leave off poaching.
And for his horn, has left it at the lodge where he lay late: Oh hoe's a pernicious limhound, turn him upon the pursue of any Lady, and if hee lose her, hang him up in the slip: when my fox bith beauty grows proud, I'll borrow him.
Is your boy turned away?
You did command sir, and I obeyed you.
Tic well done, hark ye further.
I'st possible this fellow should repent,
Me thinks that were not noble in him,
And yet he looks like a mortified member,
As if he had a sick mans salve in's mouth,
If a worse man had done this fault now,
Some physical Justice or other, would presently
Without the help of an Almanac,
Have opened the obstructions of his liver,
And let him blood with a dog-whip.
See, see, how modestly yon Lady looks,
As if she came from churching with her neighbours,
Why what a devil can you see in her face,
But that shoe's honest.
Faith no great matter to speak of: a foolish twinkling with the eye, that spoils her coat, but hee must be a cunning Herald that finds it.
See how they muster on another, O theirs a rank regient, where the devil carries the Culours, and his damned drum mayor. Now the flesh and the world come behind with the Carriage.
Sure this Lady has a good turn done against her will, before she was common talk, now none dares say Cantharides can stir her, her face looks like a warrant, willing and commanding all tongues, as they will answer it, to be tied up, and bolted, when this Lady means to let her self loose, as I live, she has got a goodly protection, and a gracious: and may use her body discreetly, for her health sake, once a week, except lent and dog-dayes. O if they were to be got for money, what a large sum would come out of the City, for these Licences.
To horse, to horse, we loose the morning Gentlemen.
What, have you lodged the Dear below?
Yes, they are ready for the bow.
Who shoots?
The Princess.
No, she'll hunt.
She'll take a stand I say.
Who else?
Why the young strange Prince.
He shall shoot in a stone bow for me,
I never loved his beyond-sea-shippe, since he forsook the Say, for paying ten shillings: he was there at the fall of a Dear, and would needs out ofhis Mightiness, give ten groats for the docets; mary his steward would have the velvet head into the bargain, to turf his hat withal, I think he should love venery: he and old Sir Tri∣strum: for ifye be remembered, hee forsook a Stag once, to strike a rascal milking in a meadow, and her hee kilt in the eye. Who shoots else?
The Lady Gallatea.
That's a good wench, an she would not chide vs for tumbling of her women in the brakes, she's liberal, and by the gods, they say honest, and whether that be a fault or no, I have nothing to do, there's all.
No, one more, Meagre.
That's a firker I'faith boy, there's a wench will ride her honchos as hard after a kennel of hounds as a hunting saddle, &amp; whē she comes home, get um clapped, and all is well again, I have known her lose her self three times in one afternoon, if the Woods had
been answerable, and has bin work enough for one man to find her, and has sweat for it: she rides well, and she pays well, hark else.
Oh that I had been nourished in the woods,
With milk of goats, and Acorns, and not known
The right of Crowns, nor the dissembling trains
Ofcruell love: but dug my self a Cave,
Where I, my fire, my Cattle and my bed,
Might have been shut together in one shed,
And then had taken me some mountain girl,
Beaten with winds, chaste as the rock whereon she dwelt,
That might have strewd my bed with leaves and reeds,
And with the skins of beasts our neighbours, and have borne
Out her big breasts, my large course ifsue:
This had bin a life free from vexation.
Oh! wicked men, aninnocent may walk safe amongst beasts,
Nothing assaults me here, I see my grieved Lord, sits as
His soul were searching out a way to leave his body.
Pardon me that brake thy last commandment, for I must speak:
You that are grieved can pity; hear my Lord.
Is there a creature yet so miserable that I can pity?
O my noble Lord, view my strange fortunes,
And bestow on me according to your bounty,
If my service can merit nothing, so much as may serve to keep
That little piece I hold of life, from cold and hunger.
Now by the gods this is unkindly done, to vex me
With thy sight, thou art fallen again to thy dissembling trade,
How should thou think to cousin me again,
Remains there yet a plague vntride for me. Even so
Thou wepst, and look, and spokst, when I first took thee,
Curse on the time. Ifthy commanding tears can work
On any other, use thy art, I'll not betray it, which way
Wilt thou take, that I may shun thee, for thine eyes are
Poison to mine, and I am loath to grow in rage:
This way or that way?
Any will serve, but I will choose to have
That path in chase, that leads unto my grave.
This is the strangest sudden chance, you Wood-man.
My Lord Leon —
Saw you a Lady come this way, on a sable horse, star∣dyed with stars of white?
Was she not young and tall?
Yes, rode she to the wood, or to the plain?
Faith my Lord, we saw none.
Pox ofyour questions then: What, is she found?
Nor will be, I think.
Let him seek his daughter himself, she cannot stray
About a little necessary natural business:
But the whole Court must be in arms,
When she has done, we shall have peace.
There's already a thousand fatherlesle tales amongst vs,
Some say, her horse run away with her; some, a wolf pursued her;
Others, it was a plot to kill her, and that armed men were seen
In the wood: but questionless, she rode away willingly.
Where is she?
Sir, I cannot tell.
Howe's that? answer me so again.
Sir, shall I lie?
Yes, lie, and dam, rather then tell me that:
I say again, where is she? mutter not,
Sir, speak you, where is she?
Sir, I doe not know.
Speak that again so boldly, and by heaven it is thy last. You fellows, answer me, where is she? mark me all, I am your king, I wish to see my daughter, show her me, I doe command you all, as you are subjects, to show her me: what, am I not your king, if I, why then, am I not to be obeyed?
Yes, if you command things possible, and honest.
Things possible, and honest, hear me then, thou traitor, that dare confine thy king, to possible and honest, thingsshew her me, or let me perish, if I cover not all Cecil with blood.
Faith I cannot, unless you'll tell me where she is.
You have betrayed me, you have let me loose the Jewel of my life, go bring her me, and set her here before me, tic the king will have it so, whose breath can still the winds, vnclowd the Sun, charm down the swelling sea, and stop the Floods of heaven: speak, can it not?
No.
No, cannot the breath of a king do this?
No more smell sweet it self, if once the lungs bee but corrupted.
Take you heed?
Take you heed, how you dare the powers
That must be just.
Alas! What are we kings, why do you gods
Place vs aboue the rest, to be ferued, flattred, and adored,
Still we believe we hold within our hands your Thunder,
And when we come to try the power we think we have,
There's not a leaf shakes at our threatenings,
I have sinned, tic true, and here I stand to be punished,
Yet would not these be punished, let me choose my way,
And lay it on.
He articles with the gods, would some body would draw bonds, for the performance of covenant betwixt them.
What, is she found?
No, we have tan her horse, hee galloped empty by, there's some treason: you Gallatea rode into the Wood with her, Why left you her?
She did command me.
Command, you should not.
It would ill become my fortunes, and my birth,
To disobey the daughter ofmy king.
O you're all cunning to obey vs, for our hurts,
But I will have her.
If I have her not, by this sword, there shall bee no more Cecil.
What, will he carry it to Spain in's pockets?
I will not leave one man alive,
But the king, a Cooke, and a Taylor.
Yes, you may do well to leave your Lady bedfellow here for a spencer.
I see the injuries I have done, must be revenged.
Sir, this is not the way to find her out.
Run all, disperse your selves, the man that finds her, or if she be kilt, the traitor, I'll make him great.
I, some would give five thousand pounds to find her.
Come, let vs seek.
Each man a several way, here I my self.
Come Gentlemen, we here.
Lady, you must go search too.
I had rather be the search my self.
Where am I now, feet find out the way, without the counsel of my troubled head, I'll follow you boldly about these woods, or mountains, through brambles, pits and fluds; Heaven I hope will ease me, I am sick.
Yonder my Lady is, gods knows, I want nothing, because I do not wish to live, yet I will try her charity. O hear you, that have plenty from that flowing store, drop some on dry grounds, see the lively red is gone to guard her heart: I fear she faints, Ma∣dame, look up: she breathes not; open once those rosie twines, and send unto my Lord your latest farewell: O she stirs; How i'st Madame? speak comfort.
Tic not gently done to put me in a miserable life, and hold me there, I prithee let me go, I shall do best without thee.
I am too blame to be so much in rage,
I'll tell her coolely, when and where I heard
This killing truth, I will be temperate in speaking,
And as just in hearing; O monstrous, tempt me not
You gods, good gods, tempt not a frail man, who's hee that has a heart, but he must ease it with his tongue.
My Lord, help, help the Princess.
I am well, forbear.
Let me love lightnings, let me be embraced and kissed
By Scorpions, or adore the eyes of Basilisks,
Rather then trust the tongues ofhell-bread women:
Some good god look down, and shrink these veins up,
Stick me here a stone, lasting to memory of this damned act.
Hear me you wicked ones, you have put hills of fire
Into my breast, not to be quenched with tears,
For which may guilt sit on your bosoms, at your meals and beds,
Despair await you, what, before my face,
Poison of Aspes between your lips, diseases bee your best issues,
Nature make a curse and throw it on you.
Dear Phylaster, leave to enrage, and hear me.
I have done,
Forgive my passion, not the calmed sea, when Eolus
Locks up his windy brood, is less disturbed then I,
I'll make you know, dear Arethusa, take this sword,
And search how temperate a heart I have, then you,
And this your boy, may live and reign in Just, without control.
Wilt thou Bellario, I prithee kill me,
Thou art poor, and moist nourish ambitious thoughts
When I am dead, thy way were freer, am I raging now?
If I were mad, I should desire to live: Sirs, feel my pulse,
Whether you have known a man in more
Equal tune to die.
Alas my Lord, your pulse keeps madmens time,
So dos your tongue.
You will not kill me then?
Kill you,
Not for the world.
I blame not thee Bellario, thou hast done but th at
Which gods would have transformed themselves to do,
Be gone, leave me without reply, this is the last
Of all our meetings, kill me with this sword, be wise,
Or worse will follow, we are two, earth cannot bear at once, resolve to do or suffer.
If my fortunes be so good to let me sall upon thy hand,
I shall have peace with earth,
Yet tell me this, there will be no slanders, no jealousy, in the other world no il here?
No.
Show me the way to joy.
Then guide my feeble hand, you that have power
To do it, for I must perform a piece of Justice:
If your youth have any way offended heaven,
Let prayers short and effectual, reconcile you to it.
I am prepared,
I will see the king if he be in the Forest,
I have hunted him this two hours, if I should come home,
And not see him, my sisters would laugh at me,
I can see nothing but people, better horsed then my self,
That out ride me, I can hear nothing but shouting,
These kings had need of strong brains,
The whooping would put a man out of his wits:
Theres a Courtier with his sword drawn, by this hand upon a wo∣man, I think.
Are you at peace?
wounds her.
With heaven and earth.
Nay, they divide thy soul and body.
Hold dastard, strike a woman, you are a craven, I warrant thee, thoud'st be loath to play half a dozen veneis at wasters with a man for a broken head.
Leave vs good friend.
What ill bred man art thou, to intrude thy self upon our private sports, our recreations.
God judge me, I understand you not,
But I know the rogue has hurt ye.
Pursue thy own affairs, it will be ill to multiply blood up∣on my head, which thou wilt force me to.
I know not your Rethrack, but I can lay it on if you touch the woman.
Slave, take what thou deserve,
Gods guard my Lord.
O, do you breath?
I hear the tread of people, I am hurt, the gods take part a∣against me, would this bore have held me thus else: I must shift for life, though I doe lose it, I would find a course,
To lose it rather by my will, then force.
I cannot follow the rogue,
I prithee wench come kiss me now.
What art thou.
Almost kilt I am, for a foolish woman,
A knave has hurt her.
The Princess Gentlemen. Wheres the wound Madame,
Is it dangerous.
He has not hurt me.
By god she lies, has hurt her in the breast, look else.
Oh secret spring ofinnocent blood.
Tic aboue wonder, who should dare this.
I felt it not.
Speak villain, who has hurt the Princess?
Is it the Princess?
I.
Then I have seen something yet.
But who has done it?
I told you a rogue, I ne'er saw him before, I.
Madame, who did it?
Some dishonest wrecth, alas I know him not,
And do forgive him.
He's hurt too, he cannot go far, I let my fathers old fox fly about's ears.
How, will you have me kill him?
Not at all, tic some distracted fellow.
By this ayre, i'll leave never a piece bigger then a nut, and bring him all in my hat.
Nay, good sir, if you do take him, bring him quick to me,
and I will study for a punishment great as his sin.
I will.
But swear.
By all my Love, I will: Wood-man, conduct the Princess unto the king, and bear that wounded fellow to dressing: Come Gentlemen, we'll follow the chase close.
I pray you friend, let me see the king.
That you shall, and receive thanks.
If I get clear of this, I'll see no more gay fights,
Oh heavens! heavy death sits on my brow,
And I must sleep, bear me thou gentle bank,
For ever if thou wilt, you sweet on all,
Let me unworthy press you, I could wish,
I rather were a Corse strewed o'er with you,
Then quick aboue you, dullness shuts my eyes, and I am giddy,
That I could take so sound a sleep,
That I might never wake.
I have done ill, my conscience calls me false,
To strike at her that would not strike at me,
When I did fight, me thought I heard her pray,
The gods to guard me, she may be abused,
And I a loathed villain if she be, she will conceal
Who hurt her, he has wounds, and cannot follow,
Neither knows he me. Who's this? Bellario sleeping,
If thou be guilty, there is no justice that thy sleep
Should be so sound, and mine whom thou hast wronged,
So broken.
Hark I am pursued, you gods I'll take
This offered means of my escape.
They have no mark to know me, but my blood,
If she be true, if false, let mischief
Light on all the world at once.
Sword print my wounds upon his sleeping body,
He has none I think are mortal,
Nor would I lay greater on thee.
O! death I hope is come, blessed be that hand, it wished me well again for pity.
I have caught my self,
The loss of blood hath stayed my flight here,
Here is he that struck thee, take thy full revenge,
Use me as I did mean thee, worse then death:
I'll teach thee to revenge. This luckless hand
Wounded the Princess, tell my followers, thou
Did receive these hurts in staying me,
And I will second thee: get a reward.
Hide, hide my Lord, and save your self.
How is this? would thou I should be safe?
Else it were vain for me to live.
These wounds I have, has not bled much,
Reach me that noble hand, I'll help to cover you.
Art thou then true to me?
Or let me perish loathed: Come my Lord,
Creep in amongst these bushes, who dos know
But that the gods may save your breeth in it, Shromd,
Then I shall die for grief, if not for this,
That I have wounded thee: What wilt thou do?
Shift for my self: Well, peace, I hear um come.
Follow, follow, that way they went.
With my own wounds I'll bloody my own sword,
I need not counterfeit to fall, heaven knows,
I can stand no longer.
To this place I tract him by his blood.
Yonder my Lord, creeps one away.
Stay sir, what are you?
A wretched creature, wounded in these woods by beasts,
Relieve me, if your names be men,
Or I shall perish.
This is he my Lord, upon my soul that hurt her,
It is the boy, that wicked boy, that served her.
O thou damned in thy creation, what cause could thou shape to strike the Princess?
Then I am betrayed,
Betrayed, no, apprehended.
I confess, urge it no more, that big with evil thoughts,
I set upon her, and did make my aim her death:
For charity let fall at once, the punishment you mean.
And do not load this weary flesh with tortour,
I will know who hired thee to this deed.
My own revenge.
Revenge, for what?
It pleased her to receive me as her Page,
And when my fortunes abed, that men strid o'er them careless.
She did shower her welcome graces on me,
And did swell my fortunes: till they ouer-flowde
Their banks, threatening the men that crossed them,
When as swift as storms arise at sea, she turned
Her eyes to burning Sins upon me, and did dry the streams
She had bestowed, leaving me worse, and more contem'd
Then other little brookes, Because I had been great,
In short, I knew I could not live:
And therefore did desire to die revenged.
If tortures can be found, long as thy natural life,
Resolve to feels utmost vigour.
Help to lead him hence.
Turn back you ravishers of innocents,
Know you the price of what you bear away
So rudely.
Who's that?
My Lord Phylaster.
Tic not the treasure of all the Kings in one,
The wealth of Tagus, nor the rocks of pearl,
That pave the Court of Neptune, can weigh down
That virtue. It was I that hurt the Princess,
Place me some god, on a Pyramids, higher then
Hills of earth: and lend a voice loud as you
Thunder to me, that from thence I may teach
The vnder-world, the worrh that dwells in him.
How's this?
My Lord, some man weary oflife that would be glad to die.
Leave this untimely curtsy Bellario.
Alas, he's mad, come, will you bear me hence?
By all the oaths that men ought most to keep,
And gods to punish most, when men do break.
He touched her nor, take heed Bellario,
How thou dost drown the virtues thou hast shown,
With perjury, by all the gods it was I,
You know she stood betwixt me and my right.
Thy own tongue be thy Judge.
It was Phylaster.
I'st not a brave boy?
Well, I fear me sir, we were deceived.
Have I no friend here?
Yes.
Then show it some good body, lend a hand to draw vs no∣rer: Would you have tears shed for you, when you die? then lay me gently on his neck, that there I may weep floods, and breath forth my spirit. Not all the wealth of Pluto, nor the gold locked in the heart of earth, can buy away this 〈◊〉 from me; this had been a ransom to have redeemed the 〈◊〉 〈◊◊〉 , had hee been taken; you hard-hearted men, more stony then these Mountains, can you see such a clear pure blood drop, and not cut your flesh to stop his life, to bind whose bitter wounds, Queens ought to tear their hairs, and with their tears bathe them: for∣give me thou that art the wealth of poor Phylaster,
Is the villain tan?
Sir, here be two confess the deed, but suit it was Phylaster.
Question it no more, it was.
The fellow that did fight with him, will tell vs that.
Ay me, I know him well.
Did not you know him?
Sir, if it were he, he was disguised.
I was so: Oh wy stars, that I should live still.
Thou ambitious fool, thou that hast laid a train for thy own life, now I doe mean to doe, I'll leave to talk, bear them to prison.
Sir, they did plot together, to take hence this harmless life, should it pass unrevenged, I should to earth, weeping. Grant me then, by all the loves a father bears his child, their custodies, that I may appoint their tortures, and their deaths.
Death, soft your law will not reach that for this fault.
Tic granted, take um to you with a guard.
Come Princely Pharamont, this business past,
We shall with more security go on
With our intended match.
I pray that this actionloose not Phylastor the hearts of the people.
Fear it not, their ouer-wise heads
Will think it but a trick.
Has the king sent for him to death?
Yes, but the king must know, it is not in his powor to war with heaven.
We linger time, the king sent for Phylastor, and the heads∣man, an hour ago.
Are all his wounds well?
All, they were but scrarches, but the loss of blood made him faint.
We dally Gentlemen.
Away.
We'll shuffle hard before he perish.
Nay, faith Phylaster, grieve not, we are well.
Nay, good my Lord forbear, we are wondrous well.
Oh Arethusa and Bellario,
Leave to be kind, I shall be shut from heaven,
If you continue so, I am a man false to a pair
Of the truest ones that ever earth bore.
Can it bear vs all? forgive me, and leave me;
But the King hath sent to call me to my death,
Oh show it me, and then forget me: and for thee my boy,
I shall deliver words, will mollify the hearts of beasts,
To spare thy innocence.
Alas, my Lord: My life is not a thing worthy
Your noble thoughts, tic not a life, tic but a piece
Of child-hood thrown away: should I out live you,
I should out live virtue and honour:
And when that day come, if ever I shall close
These eyes but once; may I live spotted for my perjury,
And waste by time to nothing.
And I the woefullest maid that ever lived,
Forced with my hands to bring my Lord to death,
Do by the honour of a Virgin swear.
To tell no hour behind it.
Make me not hated so.
Come from this prison, all joyful to our deaths.
People will tear me, when they find you true,
To such a wretch as I, I shall die loathed.
Enjoy your Kingdom peaceably, whilst I for ever sleep,
Forgotten with my faults. Every just maiden, every maid in love,
Will have a piece of me, if you be true.
My dearest, say not so.
A piece of you, he was not borne of woman, that can cut it, and look on.
Take me in tears betwixt you,
For my heart will break with shame and sorrow.
Why? tic well.
Lament no more.
Why? what would you have done?
If you had wronged me basely, and had found
My life no whit compared to yours for love,
Sirs, deal with me truly.
It was mistaken Sir.
Why, if it were?
Then sir we would have asked you pardon.
And have hope to enjoy it.
Enjoy it, I.
Would you indeed? be plain.
We would my Lord.
Forgive me then.
So, so.
Tic as it should be now.
Lead to my death.
Gentlemen, who saw the Prince?
So please you Sir, he's gone to see the City,
And the new Plot-forme, with some Gentlemen
Attending on him.
Is the Princess ready to bring her prisoner out?
She waits your grace.
Tell her we stay.
King, you may be deceived yet, the head you aim at,
Cost more setting on, then to lose it so lightly:
If it must off like a wild ouer-flow, that soopes before him,
A golden stock, and with it shakes down bridges,
Cracks the strong hearts of Pines, whose cable roots
Held out a thousand storms, a thousand thunders,
And so made weightier, takes whole villages upon his back,
And in the heate of pride charges strong Towns,
Towers, Castles, Palaces, and leaves them desolate.
So shall thy head, thy noble head, bury the lives
Of thousands, that must bleed with thee like a sacrifice,
In thy red ruins.
How now, what mask is this?
Right royal Sir,
I shall sing you an Epethelamon, but having lost my best aires with my fortunes, and wanting a celestial harp to strike this blessed union; thus in glad story I give you all these two fair Caedor branches.
The noblest of the mountains where they grew, straightest and tal∣lest, under whose still shades, the worthier beasts have made their layers, and slept free from the fervor of the Serian star, and the fell thunder-stroke, free from the Clouds, when they were big with hue∣more, and deliver in thousand spouts, that issues to the earth: O there was none but silent quiet there, till neuer-pleased fortune shot up shrubs base under branches, to devour these branches, and for a while they did so, and did reign over the Mountain, and did choke up his beauty with brakes, rud, thorns and thistles, till the Sun scorched them to the root, and dried um there, and now a gentle gail has blown again, that made these branches meet and twine together, never to be unarmed: The god that sings his Number ore marriage beds, has knit their noble hearts, and here they stand, your children, worthy king, and I have done.
How, how?
Sir, if you love it in plain truth, for now there is no mas∣king in it, this gentleman the prisoner that you gave me, is become my keeper.
And through all the bitter threats, your Jealousies, and his il fate, have wrought him, thus nobly hath hee struggled, and at length arrived here:
My dear husband.
Your dear husband. Call in the Captain of the Citadel, where you shall keep your wedding, I'll provide a mask shall make your Hymen turn his saffron into a sullen coat, and sing sad requiems to your departing souls, blood shall put out your torches, and instead of gaudy flowers about your wanton necks, an Axe shall hang, like a prodigious Motor, ready to crop your loves sweets. Hear you gods: From this time do I shake all title off of father to this woman, this base woman, and what there is of avenge∣in a Lyon chaft amongst dogs, or robed of his dear young, the same enforced more terrible, more mighty, look from me.
Sir, by that little life that I have left to swear by,
There's nothing can stir me from my self.
What I have done, I have done, without repntance,
For death to me can be no bugbare, as long as Pharamont,
Is not my heads-man.
Sweet peace upon thy soul thou worthy maid,
When ere thou die, for this time I'll excuse thee ore by thy pro∣logue.
Sir, let me speak next,
And let my dying words be better with you
Then my dull living actions: Ifyou aim at the life
Of this sweet innocent, you are a tyrant and a savage monster,
That feeds upon the blood you gave a life to,
Your memory shall be as foul behind you as you are living:
All your better deeds shall be in water writ;
But this in marble. No Chronicle shall speak you,
Though your own, but for a shame of men:
No Monument, though high and big as Pelion,
Shall be able to cover this base murder, make it rich with brass,
Gold and shining Jasper, like the Pyramids;
Lay on Epitaphs, such as make great men gods,
My little Marble, that only clothes my ashes, not my faults,
Shall far out shine it: and for after issues,
Think not so madly of the heavenly wisdoms,
That they will give you more, for your mad rage to cut off:
Unless it be some snake, or something like your self,
That in his birth shall strangle you: Remember my father king,
There was a fault, but I forgive it, let that sin
Persuade you to love this Lady, if you have a soul.
Think, save her and be saved, for my self, I have so long
Expected this glad hour, so languished under you,
And daily withered, that by the gods, it is a joy to die,
I find a recreation in it.
Whore's the King?
Here.
Get to your strength,
And rescue the Prince Pharamont from danger,
He's taken prisoner by the Citizens,
For the Lord Phylaster.
O brave fellows; Mureny my fine dear countrymen,
Mutiny. Now my brave valiant formen, show your weapons In honour of your Mistresses.
Arm, arm, arm.
A thousand devils take these Citizens.
A thousand blessings on them.
Arm, O king, the City is in Mutiny.
Led by an old gray Ruffin, who comes on
In rescue of the Lord Phylaster.
Away to the Citadel, I'll see them safe,
And then cope with these burgers, let the guard
And all the Gentlemen give strong attendance.
The City up, this was aboue our wishes.
I, and the marriage too, by al the gods, this noble Lady has deceived vs all, a plague upon my self, a thousand plagues, for ha∣uing such unworthy thoughts of her dear Honour: O, I could beat my self, or doe you beat me, and I'll beat you, for wee had all one thought.
No, no, twill but lose time.
You say true, are your swords sharpe: Well my dear
Countrymen what you lacks, ifyou continue, and fall not
Back, upon the first broken skin, I'll see you Chronicled,
And Chronicled, and cut and Chronicled, and all to be praised,
And sung in sonnets, and bathed in brave new ballads,
That all tongues shall troule you in Secula seculorum,
My kind Countrymen.
What if a toy take um i'ch hee les now, and they run all a∣way, and cry, the devil take the hindmost.
Then the same devil take the foremost too, and sauce him for his breakfast, if they all prove cowards, my curses flush a∣amongst um, and ill speeding: may they have injurious rain to keep the Gentlemen at home in rasine freeze, may the moth branch their veluets, and their silks only bee worn before sore eyes, may their false lights undo um, and discover preases, holes, staines, and oldnesse in their stuffs, and make them shop-rid, may they keep whoores, and horses, and break, and live mued up with necks ofbeefe and turnips; May they have many children, and none
like the father, and know no language but that gibberish they pra∣tle to their parcels, unless it be the gotish latin they write in their bonds, and may they write that false, and lose their debts.
Now the vengeance of all the gods confound them,
How they swarm together, what a hum they raise.
Devils choke your wide throats, if a man had need
To use your valours, we must pay a brokadge for it,
And then bring on, and you will fight like sheep:
Tic Phylaster, none but Phylaster must allay this heate,
They will not hear me speak, but fling dirt at me,
And call me tyrant. O run dear friend, and bring the Lord
Phylaster, speak him well, call him Prince,
Do him all the courtesies you can, commend me to him,
Oh! my wits, my wits.
O my brave Citizens, as I live I will not buy a pin
Out of your walls for this: nay, you shall cousin me,
And I'll thank you, and send you brawn and bakon,
Every long vocation; and foul shall come up fat
And in brave liking.
What they will do with that poor Prince, the gods know, I fear.
Why, they'll flea him, and make Church buckets on's skin, to qucnch rebellion, then clap a reuit in's sconce, and hang him up for a sign.
O worthy Sir, forgive me: Do not make your miseries
And my faults meet together, to bring a greater danger,
Be your self still sound amongst diseases, I have wronged you,
And though I find it last, and beaten to it,
Let me your goodness know, calm the people, and be
What you were born to, take your love, &amp; with her my repentance,
All my wishes, and all my prayers, by the gods,
My heart speaks all this, and if the least fall from me,
Not performed, may I be struck with thunder.
Mighty Sir, I will not doe your greatuesse so much wrong,
As not to make your word truth, free the Princess and the boy,
And let me stand the shock of this mad sea-breach,
Which I'll either turn, or perish with it.
Let your own word free her.
Then thus I take my leave, kissing your hand,
And hanging on your noble word, be Kingly,
And be not moved Sir, I shall bring you peace,
Or never bring my self back.
Now all the gods go with thee.
Come my brave Mermedons, fall on, letyour caps swarm, &amp; your nimble tongues forget your gibrish, of what you lack, and set your mouths open children, till your palates fall frighted half a fathom past the cure of bay-salt &amp; gross pepper; and then cry Phy∣laster, brave Phylaster. Let Phylaster be deep in request, my ding-a∣dings, mypaire of dear Indentures: King of clubs, thē your cut-wa∣ter-chamlets, and your painting: let not your hasty silks, dearly be∣lovers of Custards &amp; Cheescakes, or your branch cloth of bodkins, or your tyffenies, your robbin-hood scarlet and Iohns, tie your af∣fections in durance to your shops, my dainty duckers, up with your three piled spirits, that rightvalourous, and let your acute colours make the King to feel the measure of your mightiness; Phylaster, cry, myrose nobles, cry.
Phylaster, Phylaster.
How doe you like this, my Lord prisoner?
These are mad boys I can tell you,
These bee things that will not strike top-sayle to a Foist,
And let a Man of war, an Argosea,
Stoop to carry coals.
Why, you damned slaves, doe you know who I am?
Yes, my pretty Prince of puppets, we do know, and give you gentle warning, you talk no more such bugs words, lest that sod∣den
Crown should be scracht with a musket; dear Prince pip∣pin, I'll have you coddled, let him loose my spirits, and make a ring with your bills my hearts: Now let me see what this brave man dares doe: note sir, have at you with this washing blow, here I lie, doe you huff sweet Prince? I could hock your grace, and hang you cross legged, like a Hare at a Poulters stall; and do thus.
Gentlemen, honest Gentlemen —
A speaks treason Captain, shal's knock him down?
Hold, I say.
Good Captain let me have one mal it's mozart, I feel my stomach strangely provoked to bee at his Spanish pot-nowle, shal's kill him?
I, kill him, kill him.
Again I say hold.
O how rank he looks, sweet Captain let's geld him, and send his dowsets for a dish to the Burdello.
No, let's rather sell them to some woman Chemist, that extractions, she might draw an excellent provocative oil from uses them, that might be very useful.
You see, my scurvy Don, how precious you are in esteem a∣amongst vs, had you not been better kept at home, I think you had: must you needs come amongst vs, to have your saffron hide taw'd as wee intend it: My Don, Phylaster must suffer death to satisfy your melancholy spleen, he must my Don, he must; but we your Physicians, hold it fit that you bleed for it: Come my robu∣sticks, my brave regiment of rattle makers, let's cal a common cor∣nutted counsel, and like grave Senators, bear up our branched crests, in sitting upon the several tortures we shall put him to, and with as little sense as may be, put your wills in execution.
Burn him, burn him.
Hang him, hang him.
No, rather let's carbonado his cods-head, and cut him to col∣lops: shall I begin?
Stay your furies my loving Countrymen.
Phylaster is come, Phylaster, Phylaster.
My poroupines of spite, make room I say, that I may salute my brave Prince: and is Prince Phylaster at liberty?
I am, most loving countrymen.
Then give me thy Princely goll, which thus I kiss, to whom I crouch and bow; But see my royal spark, this head-strong swarm that follow me humming like a master Bee, have I led forth their Hives, and being on wing, and in our heady flight, have seized him shall suffer for thy wrongs.
I, I, let's kill him, kill him.
But hear me, Countrymen.
Hear the Prince, I say, hear Phylaster.
I, I, hear the Prince, hear the Prince.
My coming is to give you thanks, my dear Countrymen, whose powerful sway hath curbed the prosecuting fury of my foes.
We will curb um, we will curb um.
I find you will,
But if my interest in your loves be such,
As the world takes notice of, Let me crave
You would deliver Pharamont to my hand,
And from me accept this
Testimony of my love.
Which is but a pittance of those ample thanks,
Which shall redowne with showered courtesies.
Take him to thee brave Prince, and we thy bounty thank∣fully accept, and will drink thy health, thy perpetual health my Prince, whilst memory lasts amongst vs, we are thy Mermidons, my Achillis: we are those will follow thee, and in thy service will scour our rusty murins and our bill-bow-blades, most noble Phylaster, we will: Come my rowtists let's retyer till occasion calls vs to at∣tend the nohle Phylaster.
Phylaster, Phylaster, Phylaster.
Worthy sir, I owe you a life,
For but your self theres nought could have prevailed.
Tic the least of service that I owe the King,
Who was careful to preserve ye.
I ever thought the boy was honest.
Well, tic a brave boy Gentlemen.
Yet you'd not believe this.
A plague on my forwardness, what a villain was I, to wrong um so; a mischief on my muddy brains, was I mad?
A little frantic in your rash attempt, but that was your love to Phylaster, sir.
A pox on such love, have you any hope my countenance will ere serve me to look on them?
O very well Sir.
Very ill Sir, vds death, I could beat out my brains, or hang my self in revenge.
There would be little gotten by it, en keep you as ye are.
An excellent boy, Gentlemen believe it, hark the King is coming,
No news of his return,
Will not this rabble multitude be appeased?
I fear their outrage, lest it should extend
With dangering of Pharamonts life.
See Sir, Phylaster is returned.
Royal Sir,
Receive into your bosom your desired peace,
Those discontented mutineers be appeasde,
And this fortaigne Prince in safety.
How happy am I in thee Phylaster?
Whose excellent virtues begets a world of love,
I am indebted to thee for a Kingdom.
I here surrender up all Sovereignty,
Reign peacefully with thy espoused Bride,
Ashume my Son to take what is thy due.
How Sir, yer son, what am I then, your Daughter you gave to me.
But heaven hath made asignement unto him,
And brought your contract to anullity:
Sir, your entertainment hath been most fair,
Had not your hell-bred lust dried up the spring,
From whence flowed forth those favours that you found:
I am glad to see you safe, let this suffice,
Your self hath crossed your self.
They are married sir.
How married? I hope your highness will not use me so, I came not to be disgraced, and return alone.
I cannot help it sir.
To return alone, you need not sir,
Here is one will bear you company,
You know this Ladies proof, if you
Failed not in the say taging.
I hold your scoffs in vildest base contempt,
Or is there said or done, ought I repent,
But can retort even to your grinning teeth,
Your worst of spights, tho Princess lofty steps
May not be tract, yet may they tread a wry,
That boy there —
If to me ye speak Lady,
I must tell you, youhaue lost your self
In your too much forwardness, and hath forgot
Both modesty and truth, with what impudence
You have thrown most damnable aspertions
On that noble Princess and my self: witness the world;
Behold me sir.
I should know this face; my daughter.
The same sir.
How, our sometime Page, Bellario, turned woman?
Madame, the cause induced me to transform my self,
Proceeded from a respective modest
Affection I bare to my my Lord,
The Prince Phylaster, to do him service,
As far from any lascivious thought,
As that Lady is far from go oddness,
And ifmy true intents may be believed,
And from your Highness Madame, pardon find,
You have the truth.
I doe believe thee, Bellario I shall call thee still.
The faithfullest servant that ever gave attendance.
Now Lady lust, what say you to'th boy now;
Doe you hang the head, do ye, shame would flail
Into your face, if ye had grace to entertain it,
Do ye slink away?
Give present order she be banished the Court,
And straightly confined till our further
Pleasure is known.
Here is such an age of transformation, that I doe not know how to trust my self, I'll get me gone to: Sir, the disparagement you have done, must be called in question. I have power to right my self, and will.
We fear ye not sir.
Let a strong convoy guard him through the Kingdom,
With him, let's part with all our cares and fear,
And Crown with joy our happy loves success.
Which to make more full, Lady Gallatea,
Let honoured Clerimont acceptance find
In your chaste thoughts.
Tic my suit too.
Such royal spokes-men must not be denied.
Nor shall not, Madame.
Then thus I join your hands.
Our hearts were knit before.
But tic you Lady, must make all complete,
And gives a full perod to content,
Let your loves cordial again revive,
The drooping spirits of noble Trasiline.
What says Lord Leon to it?
Marry my Lord I say, I know she once loved him.
At least made show she did,
But since tic my Lord Phylasters desire,
I'll make a surrender of all the right
A father has in her; here take her sir,
With all my heart, and heaven give you joy.
Then let vs in these nuptuall feasts to hold,
Heaven hath decreed, and Fate stands uncontrolled.

