Tax me with these hot tainters?
You are too sudden;
I doe but gently tell you what becomes you,
And what may bend your honour! how these courses
Of loose and lazy pleasures; not suspected
But done and known, your mind that grants no limit
And all your Actions follows, which loose people
That see but through a mist of circumstance
Dare term ambitious; all your ways hide sores
Opening in the end to nothing but ulcers.
Your instruments like these may call the world
And with a fearful clamour, to examine
Why, and to what wee govern. From example
If not for virtues sake ye may be honest:
There have been great ones, good ones, and it is necessary
Because you are your self, and by your self
A selfe-peece from the touch of power and Justice,
You should command your self, you may imagine
Which cozens all the world, but chiefly women.
The name of greatness glorifies your actions
And strong power like a pent-house, promises
To shade you from opinion; take heed mother,
And let vs all take heed, these most abuse vs
The sins we doe, people behold through optics,
Which shows um ten times more then common vices,
And often multiplies um: then what justice
Dare we inflict upon the weak offenders
When we are thieves our selves?
This is, Martell,
Studied and pend unto you, whose base person
I charge you by the love you owe a mother
And as you hope for blessings from her prayers,
Neither to give belief to, nor allowance.
Next I tell you Sir, you from whom obedience
Is so far fled, that you dare tax a mother;
Nay further, brand her honour with your slanders,
And break into the treasures of her credit,
Your easiness is abused, your faith fraited
With lies, malicious lies, your merchant mischief,
He that never knew more trade then Tales, and tumbling
Suspicious into honest harts; what you or hee,
Or all the world dare lay upon my worth,
This for your poor opinions: I am she,
And so will bear my self, whose truth and whiteness
Shall ever stand as far from these detections
As you from duty; get you better servants,
People of honest actions without ends,
And whip these knaves away, they eat your favours,
And turn em unto poisons: my known credit
Whom all the Courts a this side Nile have envied,
And happy she could site me, brought in question
Now in my hours of age and reverence,
When rather superstition should be rendered,
And by a Rush that one days warmth
Hath shot up to this swelling; give me justice,
Which is his life.
This is an impudence,
And he must tell you, that till now mother
Brought ye a sons obedience, and now breaks it
Aboue the sufferance of a son.
Bless vs!
For I doe now begin to feel my self
Turning into a halter, and the ladder
Turning from me, one pulling at my legs too.
These truss are no mans tales, but all men's trobles,
They are, though your strange greatness would out stare v'm:
Witness the daily Libels, almost Ballads
In every place, almost in every Province,
Are made upon your lust, Tavern discourses,
Crowds crammed with whispers; Nay, the holy Temples
Are not without your curses: Now you would blush,
But your black tainted blood dare not appear
For fear I should fright that too.
O ye gods!
Doe not abuse their names: they see your actions,
And your concealed sins, though you work like Moles,
Lies level to their justice.
Art thou a son?
The more my shame is of so bad a mother,
And more your wretchedness you let me bee so;
But woman, for a mothers name hath left me
Since you have left your honour; mend these ruins,
And build again that broken fame, and fairly;
Your most intemperate fierce have burnt, and quickly
Within these ten days take a Monastery,
A most strict house, a house where none may whisper,
Where no more light is known but what may make ye
Believe there is a day where no hope dwells,
Nor comfort but in tears
O misery!
And there to cold repentance, and starved penance
Tie your succeeding days; or curse me heaven
If all your gilded knaves, brokers, and bedders,
Even he you built from nothing, strong Portalyde,
Be not made ambling Geldings; all your maids,
If that name doe not shame um, fed with spunges
To suck away their rancknesse; and your self
Only to empty Pictures and dead Arras
Offer your old desires.
I will not curse you,
Nor lay a prophecy upon your pride,
Though heaven might grant me both: unthankful, no,
I nourished ye, it was I, poor I groaned for you,
It was I felt what you suffered, I lamented
When sickness or sad hours held back your sweetness;
It was I paid for your sleeps, I watch your wakings:
My daily cares and fears, that rid, plaid, walked,
Discoursed, discovered, fed and fashiond you
To what you are, and am I thus rewarded?
But that I know these tears I could dote on em.
And knecle to catch um as they fall, then knit um
Into an Armlet, ever to be honoured;
But woman, they are dangerous drops, deceitfuil,
Full of the weeper, anger, and ill nature.
In my last hours despised.
That Text should tell,
How ugly it becomes you to err thus;
Your flames are spent, nothing but smoke maintains ye,
And those your favour and your bounty suffers
Lye not with you, they doe but lay lust on you,
And then embrace you as they caught a palsy;
Your power they may love, and like spanish Jennets
Commit with such a gust.
I would take whipping,
And pay a Fine now.
But were ye once disgraced,
Or fallen in wealth, like leaves they would fly from you,
And become browse for every beast; you willed me
To stock my self with better friends, and servants;
With what face dare you see me, or any mankind,
That keep a race of such unheard of relics,
Bawds, Lechers, Letchecs, female fornications,
And children in their rudiments to vices,
Old men to show examples: and lest Art
Should loose her self in act, to call back custom,
Leave these, and live like
I told you how
And when your eyes have dropped away remembrance
Of what you were. I am your son! perform it.
Am I a woman, and no more power in me,
To tie this Tiger up, a soul to no end,
Have I got shame and lost my will; Brunhalt
From this accursed hour, forget thou bor'st him,
Or any part of thy blood gave him living,
Let him be to thee, an Antipathy,
A thing thy nature sweates at, and turns backward:
Throw all the mischiefs on him that thy self
Or women worse then thou art, have invented,
And kill him drunk, or doubtful.
Such a sweat,
I never was in yet, clipped of my minstrels,
My toys to prick up wenches withal; uphold me,
It runs like snowballs through me.
Now my varlets,
My slaves, my running thoughts, my executions.
Lord how she looks!
Hell take ice all.
Wee shall bee gilt.
Your Mistress,
Your old and honoured Mistress, you tired curtalls
Suffers for your base sins; I must be cloistered,
Mewed up to make me virtuous, who can help this,
Now you stand still like Statues; come Protaldye,
One kiss before I perish, kiss me strongly,
Another, and a third.
I fear not gelding
As long as she holds this way.
The young courser,
That vnlickt lump of mine, will win thy Mistress,
Must I be chaste Protaldye?
Thus and thus Lady:
It shall be so, let him seek fools for Vestalls,
Here is my cloister.
But what safety Madam
Find you in staying here?
Thou hast hit my meaning,
I will to Thierry son of my blessing,
And there complain me, tell my tale so subtly
That the cold stones shall sweat; and statues morn,
And thou shalt weep Protaldie in my witness,
And there forswear.
Yes, any thing but gelding,
I am not yet in quiet Noble Lady,
Let it be done to night, for without doubt
Tomorrow we are capons.
Sleep shall not seas me,
Nor any food befriend me but thy kisses.
Ever I forsake this desert, I live honest?
He may as well bid dead men walk, I humbled
Or bent below my power? let night dogs tear me,
And goblins ride me in my sleep to Jolly,
Ere I forsake my sphere.
This place you will.
What's that to you, or any,
Ye dosse, you powdered pigsbones, rubarbe glister?
Must you know my designs, a college on you,
The proverb makes but fools:
But Noble Lady.
You a saucy ass too, off I will not,
If you but anger me, tell a sowgelder
Have cut you all like colts, hold me and kiss me,
For I am too much troubled make up my treasure,
And get me horses private, come about it.
Thought I assure my self (Martell) your counsel
Had no end but alleagance and my honour:
Yet I am Jealous, I have passed the bounds
Of a sons duty; for suppose her worse
Then you report, not by bare circumstance
But evident proof confirmed he's given her out:
Yet since all weaknesses in a kingdom, are
No more to be severely punished, then
The faults of Kings are by the Thunderer
As oft as they offend, to be revenged:
If not for piety, yet for policy,
Since some are of necessity to be spared,
I might, and now I wish I had not looked
With such strict eyes into her follies.
Sir, a duty well discharged is never followed
By sad repentance, nor did your Highness ever
Make payment of the debt you owed her, better
Then in your late reproofs not of her, but
Those crimes that made her worthy of reproof.
The most remarkable point in which kings differ
From private men, is, that they not alone
Stand bound to be in themselves innocent,
But that all such as are elide to them
In neeren esse, or dependence, by their care
Should be free from suspicion of all crime;
And you have reaped a double benefit
From this last great act: first in the restraint
Of her lost pleasures, you remove th'example
From oath????????? of the like licentiousness,
Then when it is known that your severity
Extended to your mother, who dares hope for
The least Indulgence or conniuence in
The easiest slips that may prove dangerous
To you or to the kingdom?
I must grant
Your reasons good (Martell) if as she is
My Mother, she had been my subject, or
That only here she could make challenge to
A place of being; but I know her temper
And fear (if such a word become a king,)
That in discovering her, I have let loose
A Tigress, whose rage being shut up in darkness,
Was grievous only to her self; which brought
Into the view of light, her cruelty
Provoked by her own shame, will turn on him
That foolishly presumed to let her see
The loathed shape of her own deformity.
Beasts of that nature when rebellious threats
Begin to appear only in their eyes,
Or any motion that may give suspicion
Of the least violence, should be chaind up;
Their fanges and teeth, and all their means of hurt,
Pard of, and knocked out, and so made unable
To do ill; they would soon begin to loath it.
I'll apply nothing, but had you grace done,
Or would do yet, what your less forward zeal
In words did only threaten, far less danger
Would grow from acting it on her, then may
Perhaps have being from her apprehension
Of what may once be practised: for believe it,
Who confident of his own power, presumes
To spend threats on an enemy, that hath means
To shun the worst they can effect, gives armour
To keep off his own strength; nay more, disarms himself, and lies vngarded against all harms
Or doubt, or malice may produce.
It is true,
And such a desperate cure I would have used,
If the intemperate patient had not been
So near me as a mother; but to her,
And from me gentle unguents only were
To be applied: and as physicians
When they are sick of fevers, eat themselves
Such viands as by their directions are
Forbid to others, though alike diseased,
So she considering what she is, may challenge
Those cordials to restore her, by her birth,
And privilege, which at no suite must be
Granted to others.
May your pious care
Effect but what it aimde at, I am silent.
What laughed you at Sir?
I have some occasion,
I should not else; and the same cause perhaps
That makes me do so, may beget in you
A contrary effect.
Why, what's the matter?
I see and joy to see that sometimes poor men,
(And most of such are good) stand more indebted
For means to breathe to such as are held vicious,
Then those that wear like Hypocrites on their foreheads,
Th'ambitious titles of just men and virtuous.
Speak to the purpose.
Who would ever have thought
The good old Queen, your Highness reverend mother,
Into whose house (which was an Academ,)
In which all principles of lust were practised,
No soldier might presume to set his foot;
At whose most blessed intercession
All offices in the state, were charitably
Conferred on panders, o're-worne chamber wrestlers,
And such physicians as knew how to kill,
With safety under the pretence of saving,
And such like children of a monstrous peace,
That she I say should at the length provide
That men of war and honest younger brothers,
That wold not owe their feeding to their codpiece,
Should be esteemed of more then mothers, or drones,
Or idle vagabonds.
I am glad to hear it,
Prithee what course takes she to do this?
One that cannot fail, she and virtuous train
With her Jewels and all that was worthy the carrying,
The last night left the court; and as it is more
Then said, for it is confirmed by such as met her,
She's fled unto your brother.
How?
Nay storm not,
For if that wicked tongue of hers hath not
Forgot its pace, and Thierry be a Prince
Of such a fiery temper, as report
Has given him out for; you shall have cause to use
Such poor men as my self; and thank vs too
For coming to you, and without petitions;
Pray heaven reward the good old woman for it.
I foresaw this.
I hear a tempest coming,
That sings mine and my kingdoms ruin; hast,
And cause a troop of horse to fetch her back:
Yet stay, why should I use means to bring in
A plague that of her self hath left me? Muster
Our soldiers up, we'ele stand upon our guard,
For we shall be attempted; yet forbear
The inequality of our powers will yield me
Nothing but loss in their defeature: something
Must be done, and done suddenly, save your labour,
In this i'll use no counsel but mine own,
That course though dangerous is best. Command
Our daughter be in readiness, to attend vs:
Martell, your company, and honest Vitry,
Thou wilt along with me.
Yes any where,
To be worse then I am here, is past my fear.
You are here in a sanctuary; and that viper
(Who since he hath forgot to be a son,
I much disdain to think of as a brother)
Had better in despite of all the gods,
To have razed their Temples; and spurned down their altars,
Then in his impious abuse of you,
To have called on my just anger.
Princely son;
And in this worthy of a near name,
I have in the relation of my wrongs
Been modest, and no word my tongue delivered
T'expresse my insupportable injuries,
But gave my hart a wound: nor has my grief
Being from what I suffer; but that he
Degenerate as he is, should be the actor
Of my extremes; and force me to divide
The fires of brotherly affection,
Which should make but one flame.
That part of his
As it deserves shall burn no more, if or
The tears of Orphans, widows, or all such
As dare acknowledge him to be their Lord,
Joined to your wrongs, with his hart blood have power
To put it out: and you, and these your servants,
Who in our favours shall find cause to know
In that they left not you, how dear we hold them;
Shall give Theodoret to understand,
His ignorance of the prizelesse Jewel, which
He did possess in you, mother in you,
Of which I am more proud to bee the doner,
Then if the absolute rule of all the world
Were offered to this hand; once more you are well-come,
Which with all ceremony due to greatness
I would make known, but that our just revenge
Admits not of delay; your hand Lord General.
Your favour and his merit I may say
Have made him such, but I am jealous how
Your subjects will receive it.
How, my subjects?
What do you make of me? Oh heaven! my subjects!
How base should I esteem the name of Prince,
If that poor dust, were any thing before
The whirlwind of my absolute command?
Let them be happy, and rest so contented:
They pay the tribute of their harts and knees,
To such a Prince that not alone he has power,
To keep his own but to increase it; that
Although he hath a body may add to
The famed night labour of strong Hercules:
Yet is the moister of a continence
That so can temper it, that I forebear
Their daughters, and their wives, whose hands though strong,
As yet have never drawn by unjust mean
Their proper wealth into my treasury.
But I grow glorious, and let them beware
That in their least ripening at my pleasures,
They change not a mild Prince, (for if provoked
I dare and will be so) into a Tyrant.
You see there's hope that we shall rule again,
And your fallen fortunes rise.
I hope your Highness
Is pleased that I shall still hold my place with you,
For I have been so long used to provide you
Fresh bits of flesh since mine grew stale, that surely
If cashiered now, I shall prove a bad Cator
In the Fishmarket of cold chastity,
For me I am your own, nor since I first
Knew what it was to serve you, have remembered
I had a soul, but such a one whose essence
Depended wholly on your Highness pleasure,
And therefore Madam---
Rest assured you are,
Such instruments we must not lose.
Our service.
You have viewed them then, what's your opinion of em?
In this dull time of peace, we have prepared em
Apt for the war. Ha?
Sir, they have limbs
That promise strength sufficient, and rich armours
The soldiers best loved wealth: more, it appears
They have been drilled, nay very prettily drilled,
For many of them can discharge their muskets
Without the danger of throwing off their heads,
Or being offensive to the standers by,
By sweating too much backwards; nay I find
They know the right, and left hand file, and may
With some impulsion no doubt be brought
To pass the A, B, C, of war, and come
Unto the Horne-booke.
Well, that care is yours;
And see that you effect it.
I am slow
To promise much; but if within ten days,
By precepts and examples, not drawn from
Worm eaten presidents of the Roman wars,
But from mine own, I make them not transcend
All that ever yet bore arms, let it be said,
Protaldye brags, which would be unto me
As hateful as to be esteemed a coward:
For Sir, few Captains know the way to win him,
And make the soldiers valiant. You shall seem
Lie with them in their trenches, talk, and drink,
And be together drunk; and what seems stranger,
We'ele sometimes wench together, which once practiced
And with some other care and hidden acts,
They being all made mine, i'll breathe into them
Such fearless resolution and such fervor,
That though I brought them to besiege a fort,
Whose walls were steeple high, and cannon proof,
Not to be vndermind, they should fly up,
Like swallows, and the parapet once won;
For proof of their obedience, if I willed them
They should leap down again; and what is more,
By some directions they should have from me,
Not break their necks.
This is aboue belief.
Sir, on my knowledge though hee hath spoke much,
He's able to do more.
She means on her.
And howsoever in his thankfulness,
For some few favours done him by my self,
He left Austrachia, not Theoderet,
Though hee was chiefly aimde at, could have laid
With all his Dukedoms power, that shame upon him,
Which in his barbarous malice to my honour,
He swore with threats to effect.
I cannot but
Believe you Madam, thou art one degree
Grown nearer to my hart, and I am proud
To have in thee so glorious a plant
Transported hither; in thy conduct, we
Go on assured of conquest, our remove
Shall be with the next sun.
Amazement leave me, it is hee.
We are again undone.
Our guilt hath no assurance nor defence.
If now your ever ready witfaile to protect vs,
We shall be all discovered.
Be not so
In your amazement and your foolish fears,
I am prepared for it.
How? Not one poor welcome,
In answer of so long a journey made
Only to see your brother.
I have stood
Silent thus long, and am yet vnresolude
Whether to entertain thee on my sword,
As fits a parricide of a mothers honour;
Or whether being a Prince, I yet stand bound
(Though thou art here condemned) to give thee hearing
Before I execute. What foolish hope,
(Nay pray you forbear) or desperate madness rather,
(Unless thou come assured, I stand in debt
As far to all impiety as thy self)
Has made thee bring thy neck unto the axe?
Since looking only here, it cannot but
Draw fresh blood from thy seared up, conscience,
To make thee sensible of that horror, which
They ever bear about them, that like Narrow,
Like said I? thou are worse: since thou dare strive
In her defame to murder thine alive.
That she that long since had the boldness to
Be a bad woman, (though I wish some other
Should so report her) could not want the cunning,
(Since they go hand in hand) to lay fair colours
On her black crimes, I was resolude before,
Nor make I doubt but that she hath impoysonde
Your good opinion of me, and so far
Incensed your rage against me, that too late
I come to plead my innocence.
To excuse thy impious scandals rather.
Rather forced with fear to be compelde to come.
For bear.
This moves not me, and yet had I not been
Transported on my own integrity,
I neither am so odious to my subjects,
Nor yet so barren of defence, but that
By force I could have justified my guilt,
Had I been faulty: but since innocence
Is to it self an hundred thousand guards,
And that there is no son, but though he owe
That name to an ill mother, but stands bound
Rather to take away with his own danger
From the number of her faults, then for his own
Security, to add unto them. This,
This hath made me to prevent th'expence
Of blood on both sides, the injuries, the rapes,
(Pages, that ever waite upon the war:)
The account of all which, since you are the cause,
Believe it, would have been required from you;
Rather I say to offer up my daughter,
Who living only could revenge my death,
With my hart blood a sacrifice to your anger,
Then that you should draw on your head more curses
Then yet you have deserved.
I do begin
To feel an alteration in my nature,
And in his full sailed confidence, a shower
Of gentle rain, that falling on the fire
Of my hot rage hath quenched it, ha! I would
Once more speak roughly to him, and I will;
Yet there is something whispers to me, that
I have said too much. How is my heart divided
Between the duty of a son, and love
Due to a brother! yet I am swayed here,
And must ask of you, how tic possible
You can affect me that have learned to hate,
Where you should pay all love?
Which ioynde with duty,
Upon my knees I should be proud to tender,
Had she not used her self so many swords
To cut those bonds that tide me to it.
Fie, no more of that.
Alas it is a theme,
I take no pleasure to discourse of; would
It could asloone be buried to the world,
As it should die to me: nay more, I wish
(Next to my part of heaven) that she would spend
The last part of her life so here, that all
Indifferent Judges might condemn me, for
A most malicions slanderer: nay text it
Upon my forehead, if you hate me mother,
Put me to such a shame, pray you do, believe it
There is no glory that may fall upon me,
Can equal the delight I should receive
In that disgrace; provided the repeal
Of your long banished virtues, and good name,
Ushered me to it.
See, she shows her self
An easy mother, which her tears confirm.
Tic a good sign, the comfortablest rain
I ever saw.
Embrace: why this is well,
May never more but love in you, and duty
On your part rise between you.
Do you hear Lord General,
Does not your new stamped honour on the sudden
Begin to grow sick?
Yes I find it fit,
That putting off my armour, I should think of
Some honest hospital to retiro to.
Sure although I am a bawd, yet being a Lord
They cannot whip me for it, what's your opinion?
The beadle will resolve you, for I cannot,
There is something that more near concerns myself,
That calls upon me.
Note but yonder scarabs,
That lived upon the dung of her base pleasures,
How from the fear that she may yet prove honest,
Hang down their wicked heads.
What is that to me?
Though they and all the polecats of the Court,
Were trustde together, I perceive not how
It can advantage me a cardekue,
To help to keep me honest.
How, from whence?
These letters will resolve your grace.
What speak they? Reads:
How all things meet to make me this day happy?
See mother, brother, to your reconcilement
Another blessing almost equal to it,
Is coming towards me; my contracted wise,
Ordella daughter of wise Dataricke
The King of Are gone is on our confines;
Then to arrive at such a time, when you
Are happily here to honour with your presence
Our long deferde, but much wished nuptial,
Falls out aboue expression; heaven be pleased
That I may use these blessing poured on me
With moderation.
Hell and furies aid me,
That I may have power to avert the plagues
That pressed upon me.
Two days journey say thou,
We will set forth to meet her, in the mean time
See all things be prep??rde to entertain her:
Nay let me haud your companies, there's a Forest
In the midway shall yield vs hunting sport,
To ease our travail, ilenot have a brow
But shall we are mirth upon it, therefore clear them,
We'cle wash away all sorrow in glad feasts,
And the war we mean to men, we'ele make on beasts.
Oh that I had the Magic to transform you
Into the fhape of such, that your own hounds
Might tear you peece-meale; are you so stupid?
No word of comfort? Have I fed you mothers
From my excess of moisture, with such cost,
And can you yield no other retribution,
But to devour your maker, pander, sponge,
Impoysner, all grown barren?
You yourself
That are our mover, and for whom alone
We live, have failed your self in giving way
To the reconcilement of your sons.
Which if
You had prevented, or would teach vs how
They might again be severed, we could easily
Remove all other hindrances, that stop
The passage of your pleasures.
And for me,
If I fail in my office to provide you
Fresh delicates, hang me.
Oh you are dull, and find not
The cause of my vexation; their reconcilement
Is a mocke-castle built upon the sand
By children, which when I am pleased to o'rethrow,
I can with ease spurn down.
If so, from whence
Grows your affliction?
My grief comes along
With the new Queen, in whose grace all my power
Must suffer ship wrack: for me now,
That hitherto have kept the first, to know
A second place, or yield the least precedence
To any others, death; to have my sleeps
Less inquired after, or my rising up
Saluted with less reverence, or my gates
Empty of suitors; or the Kings great favours
To pass through any hand but mine, or hee
Himself to be directed by another,
Would be to me: do you understand me, yet
No means to prevent this.
Fame gives her out
To be a woman of a chastity
Not to be wrought upon, and therefore Madam
For me, though I have pleased you, to attempt her
Were to no purpose.
Tush, some other way.
Faith I know none else, allmy bringing up
Aimdeat no other learning.
Give me leave,
If my art fail me not, I have thought on
A speeding project.
What first? but effect it,
And thou shalt be my AEsculapius,
Thy image shall be set up in pure gold,
To which i'll fall down and worship it.
The Lady is fair.
Exceeding fair.
And young.
Some fifteen at the most.
And loves the King with equal ordor.
More, she dotes on him.
Well then, what think you if I make a drink
Which given unto him on the bridal night,
Shall for five days so rob his faculties
Of all ability to pay that duty,
Which new made wives expect, that she shall swear
She is not matched to a man.
'T were rare.
And then
If she have any part of woman in her,
She'll or fly out, or at least give occasion
Of such a breach which ????????? can be made up,
Since he that to all else did never fail
Of as much as could be performed by man,
Proves only ice to her.
It is excellent.
The Phystian
Helps ever at a dead lift; a fine calling,
That can bothraise, and take down, our upon thee.
For this one service I am ever thine,
Prepare it; isle give it him my self, for you Protaldye,
By this kiss, and our promised sport at night, (do conjure you) to bear up; not minding
The opposition of Theodoret,
Or any of his followers; what so ere
You are, yet appear valiant, and make good
The opinion that is had of you: for my self
In the new Queens remove, being made secure,
Fear not, isle make the future building sure.
This Stag stood well, and cunningly.
My horse
I am sure, has found it, for her sides are
Blooded from flank to shoulder, wheres the troop?
Past home-ward, weary and tired as we are,
Now Martell, have you remembered what we though of?
Yes Sir, I have snigled him, and if there be
Any desert in his blood, beside the itch,
Or manly hear, but what decoctions
Leaches, and callises have cramde into him,
Your Lordship thall know perfect.
VVhats that, may not I know too?
Yes Sir,
To that end we cast the project.
What first?
A desire Sir,
Upon the gilded flag your graces favour
Has stuck up for a General, and to inform you,
For this hour hee shall pass the test, what valour,
Stayed judgment, soul, or safe discretion
Your mothers wandering eyes, and your obedience
Have flung upon vs, to assure your knowledge,
He can bee, dare be, shall be, must be nothing,
Load him with piles of honours; set him off
With all the cunning foils that may deceive vs:
But a poor, cold, vnspirited, vnmannerde,
Dishonest, vnaffected, undone, fool,
And most unheard of coward, a mere lump
Made to load beds withal, and like a nightmare
Ride Ladies, that forget to say their prayers,
One that dares only be diseased, and in debt,
Whose body mews more plasters every month,
Then women do old faces.
No more, I know him,
I now repent my error, take your time
And try him home, ever thus far reserved,
You tie your anger up.
I lost it else Sir. violence,
Bring me his sword fair taken, without
For that will best declare him.
That's the thing.
And my best horse is thine.
Your graces servant.
You'll hune no more Sir,
Not to day, the weather
Is grown too warm, besides, the dogs are spent,
We'ele take a cooler morning, let's to horse,
And hollow in the troop.
I marry Twainer,
This woman gives indeed, these are the Angels
That are the keepers saints.
I like a woman
That handles the dears dowsets with discretion;
And pays vs by proportion:
Tic no treason
To think this good old Lady has a stump yet
That may require a currall.
And the bells too,
She has lost a friend of me else, but here's the clarke,
No more for fear ath bell ropes:
How now Keepers,
Saw you the King?
Yes Sir, he's newly mounted,
And as we take it ridden home.
Farewell then.
My honoured Lord, Fortune has made me happy
To meet with such a man of men to side me.
How Sir? I know ye not,
Nor what your fortune means.
Few words shall serve, I am betrayed Sir,
Innocent and honest; malice, and violence
Are both against me, basely and foully laid for;
For my life Sir, danger is now about me,
Now in my throat Sir.
Where Sir?
Nay I fear not,
And let it now power down in storms upon me,
I have met a noble guard:
Your meaning Sir,
For I have present business.
O my Lord,
Your honour cannot leave a gentleman
At least a fair design of this brave nature,
To which your worth is wedded, your profession
Hatched in, and made one piece, in such a peril,
There are but six my Lord.
What six?
Six villains sworn, and in pay to kill me.
Six?
Alas Sir, what can six do, or six score now you are present,
Your name will blow em off, say they have shot too,
Who dare present a piece? your valour's proof Sir.
No, i'll assure you Sir, nor my discretion
Against a multitude; it is true I dare fight,
Enough, and well enough, and long enough:
But wisdom Sir, and weight of what is on me,
In which I am no more mine own, nor yours Sir,
Nor as I take it, any single danger,
But what concerns my place, tells me directly,
Beside my person my fair reputation,
If I thrust into crowds, and seek occasions
Suffers opinion, six? Why Hercules
Avoided two man, yet not to give example:
But only for your present dangers sake Sir,
Were there but four Sir, I cared not if I killed um,
They will serve to set my sword.
There are but four Sir,
I did mistake um, but four such as Europe
Excepting your great valour.
Well considerde,
I Will not meddle with um, four in honour,
Are equal with fourscore, besides they are people
Only directed by their fury.
So much nobler shall be your way of Justice.
That I find not.
You will not leave me thus?
I would not leave you; but look you Sir,
Men of my place, and business, must not
Be questioned thus.
You cannot pass Sir,
Now they have seen me with you, without danger,
They are here Sir, within hearing, take but two.
Let the Law take um, take a tree Sir,
Isle take my horse, that you may keep with safety:
If they have brought no hand-sawes, within this hourc
Isle send you rescue, and a toil to take um.
You shall not go so poorly, stay but one Sir.
I have been so hamperde with these rescues,
So hewde and tortured, that the truth is Sir,
I have mainly vowed against um, yet for your sake,
If as you say there be but one, isle stay,
And see fair play a both sides.
There is no
More Sir, and as I doubt a base one two.
Fie on him, go lug him out by the ears.
Yes:
This is he Sir, the basest in the kingdom.
Do you know me?
Yes for a general fool,
A knave, a coward, and upstart stallion bawd,
Beast, barking puppy, that dares not bite.
The best man best knows patience.
Yes,
This way Sir, now draw you sword, and right you.
Or render it to me, for one you shall do.
If wearing it may do you any honour,
I shall be glad to grace you, there it is Sir.
Now get you home, and tel your Lady Mrs.
She has shot up a sweet mushrump, quit your place too,
And say you are counselde well, thou wilt be beaten else
By thine own lanceprisadoes; when they know thee,
That tunes of oil of roses will not cure thee;
Go get you to your foyning work at Court,
And learn to sweat again, and care dry mutton;
An armour like a frost will search your bones,
And make you roar you rogue; not a reply,
For if you do your cares go off.
Still patience.
It is your place, and though in all things else
You may and ever shall command me, yet
In this isle be obeyed.
Sir, the consent
That made me yours, shall never teach me to
Repent I am so, yet be you but pleased
To give me leave to say so much; the honour
You offer me were better given to her,
To whom you owe the power of giving.
Mother,
You hear this and rejoice in such a blessing
That pays to you so large a share of duty,
But fie no more, for as you hold a place
Nearer my heart then she, you must fit nearest
To all those graces, that are in the power
Of Majesty to bestow.
Which i'll provide,
Shall be short lived, Leisure.
I have it ready.
It is well, waite on our cup.
You honour me.
We are dull,
No object to provoke mirth.
Martell,
If you remember Sir, will grace your feast
With something that will yield matter of mirth,
Fit for no common view.
Touching Protaldye.
You have it.
What of him? I fear his basenosse aside
In spite of all the titles that my favours
Have clothed him, which will, make discovery
Of what is yet concealed.
Look Sir, he has it,
Nay wee shall have peace when so great a soldier
As the renoumde Protaldye, will give up
His sword rather then use it.
It was thy plot,
Which I will turn on thy own head. aside
Pray you speak,
How won you him to part from it?
Won him Sir,
He would have yielded it upon his knees
Before he would have hazarded the exchange
Of a phillip of the forehead: had you willde me,
I durst have undertook he should have sent you
His nose, provided that the loss of it
Might have saved the rest of his face; he is Sir
The most vnutterable coward, that ere nature
Blessed with hard shoulders, which were only given him,
To the ruin of bastinados.
Possible:
Observe but how shefrets.
Why belecue it:
But that I know the shame of this disgrace,
Will make the beast to live with such, and never
Presume to come more among men; i'll hazard
My life upon it, that a boy of twelve
Should scourge him hither like a parish top,
And make him dance before you.
Slave thou least,
Thou dare as well speak treason in the hearing
Of those that have the power to punish it.
As the least fillable of this before him,
But it is thy hate to me.
Nay, pray you Madam,
I have no ears too hear you, though a footo
To let you understand what he is.
Villain.
You are to violent.
The worst that can come
Is blanketing; for beating, and such virtues
I have been long acquainted with.
Oh strange!
Behold the man yon talk of.
Give me leave,
Or free thy self (think in what place you are)
From the foul imputation that is laid
Upon thy valour (be bold, i'll protect you)
Or here I vow (deny it or forswear it)
These honours which thou wear unworthily,
Which be but impudent enough and keep them,
Shall be torn from thee with thy eyes.
I have it,
My valour! is there any here beneath,
The stile of king, dares question it?
This is rare.
Which of my actions, which have still been noble,
Has tendered me suspected?
Nay Martell,
You must not fall off.
Oh Sir, fear it not,
Do you know this sword?
Yes.
Pray you on what terms
Did you part with it:
Part with if say you?
So.
Nay study not an answer, confess freely.
Oh I remember't now, at the flags falls,
As we to day were hunting, a poor fellow,
And now I view you better, I may say
Much of your pitch: this silly wretch spoke of,
With his petition falling at my feet,
(Which much against my will he kissed,) desired.
That as a special means for his preferment,
I would vouchsafe to let him use my sword,
To cut off the stags head.
Will you hear that?
This lie bears a similitude of truele,
I ever courteous, (a great weakness in me)
Granted his humble suite.
Oh impudence!
This change is excellent.
A word with you,
Deny it not, I was that man disguised,
You know my temper, and as you respect
A daily cudgelling for one whole year,
Without a second pulling by the ears,
Or tweakes by the nose, or the most precious balm
You used of patience, patience do you mark me,
Confess before these kings with what base fear
Thou did deliver it.
Oh! I shall burst,
And if I have not instant liberty
To tear this fellow limb by limb, the wrong
Will break my hart, although Herculean,
And somewhat bigger; there's my gage, pray you here
Let me redeem my credit.
Ha, ha, forbear.
Pray you let me take it up, and if I do not
Against all odds of armour and of weapons,
With this make him confess it on his knees,
Cut off my hcad.
No, that is my office.
Fie, you take the hangmans place.
Nay good my Lord
Let me atone this difference, do not suffer
Our bridal night to be the Centaurs feast,
You are a Knight and bound by oath to grant
All just suits unto Ladies; for my sake
Forget your supposed wrong.
Well, let him thank yon,
For your sake he shall live, perhaps a day,
And may be, on submission longer,
Nay, Martell, you must bee patient.
I am yours,
And this slave shall be once more mine.
Sit all;
One health, and so to bed, for I too long
Defer my choifest delicates.
Which if poison
Have any power, thou shalt like Tantalus
Behold and never taste; be careful.
Fear not.
Though it be rare in our sex, yet for once
I will begin a health.
Let it come freely.
Leisure, the cup; here to the son we hope
This night shall be an Embrion.
You have named
A blessing that I most desired, I pledge you,
Give me a larger cup, that is too little
Unto so great a god.
Nay, then you wrong me,
Follow as I began.
Well as you please.
First done?
Unto your wish, I warrant you,
For this night I durst trust him with my mother.
So, it is gone round, lights.
Pray you use my service.
It is that which I shall ever owe you Madam,
And must have none from you, pray you pardon me.
Good rest to all.
And to you pleasant labour:
Martell your company, Madam good night.
Nay you have cause to blush, but I will hide it,
And what's more I forgive you; first not pity
That thou that art the first to enter combat
With any woman, and what is more, overcome her,
(In which she is best pleased,) should be so fearful
To mere a man.
Why would you have me lose
That blood that is dedicated to your service,
In any other quarrel?
No, reserve it
As I will study to preserve thy credit,
You sirha; be it your care to find out one
That is poor though valiant, that at any rate
Will, to redeem my servants reputation,
Receive a public baffling.
Would your highness
Were pleased to inform me better of your purpose:
Why one Sir, that would thus be boxde,
Or kicked; do you apprehend me now?
I feel you Madam,
The man that shall receive this from my Lord,
Shall have a thousand crowns.
Hee shall.
besides
His day of bastinadoing past ore,
He shall not lose your grace, nor your good favour.
That shall make way to it.
It must be a man
Of credit in the Court, that is to be
The foil unto your valour.
True, it should.
And if he have place there, it is not the worse:
It is much the better.
If he be a Lord,
Twill be the greater grace.
Thou art in the right.
Why then behold that valiant man and Lord,
That for your sake will take a cudgelling,
For be assured when it is spread abroad
That you have dealt with me, the'ile give you out
For one of the nine Worthies.
Our you pander,
Why to beat thee is only exercise
For such as do affect it, lose not time
In vain replies, but do it: come my solace,
Let vs to bed, and our desires once quenched,
We'ele there determine of Theodorets death,
For he's the engine used to ruin vs:
Yet one worko more, Leisure, art thou assured
The potion will work?
My life upon it.
Come my Protaldye, then glut me with
Those best delights of man, that are denied
To her that does expect them, being a bride.
Sure I have drunk the blood of Elephants,
The tears of mandrake and the marble dew,
Mixed in my draught, have quenched my natural heate,
And left no spark of fire but in mine eyes,
With which I may behold my miseries:
Ye wretched flames which play upon my sight,
Turn inward, make me all one piece, though earth;
My tears shall overwhelm you else too.
What moves my Lord to this strange sadness?
If any late discerned want in me,
Give cause to your repentance, care and duty
Shall find a painful way to recompense.
Are you yet frozen veins, feel you a breath,
Whose temperate heate would make the North star reel,
Her icy pillars thawed, and do you not melt?
Draw nearer, yet nearer,
That from thy barren kiss thou moist confess
I have not heate enough to make a blush.
Speak nearer to my understanding, like a husband.
How should he speak the language of a husband,
Who wants the tongue and organs of his voice?
It is a phrase will part with the same ease
From you with that you now deliver.
Bind not his cares up with so dull a charm,
Who hath no other sense left open; why should thy words
Find more restraint then thy free speaking actions,
Thy close embraces and thy mid-night sighs,
The silent orators to slow desire?
Strive not to win content from ignorance
Which must be lost in knowledge: heaven can witness
My farthest hope of good reached at your pleasure,
Which seeing alone may in your look be read:
Add not a doubtful comment to a text
That in it selfe's direct and easy.
Oh thou hast drunk the juice of hemlock too,
Or did upbraided nature make this pair
To show she had not quite forgot her first
Justly praised workmanship, the first chaste couple
Before the want of joy, taught guilty sight
A way through shame and sorrow to delight:
Say, may we mix as in their innocence
When turtles kissed, to confirm happiness,
Not to beget it?
I know no bar.
Should I believe thee, yet thy pulse beats woman;
And says the name of wife did promise thee
The blessed reward of duty to thy mother,
Who gave so often witness of her joy,
When she did boast thy likeness to her husband.
It is true, that to bring forth a second to your self,
Was only worthy of my Virgin losle;
And should I prize you less vnpatternde Sir,
Then being, exemplified, first not more honour
To be possessor of vnequalde virtue,
Then what is paralleled? give me belief,
The name of mother knows no way of good,
More then the end in me: who weds for lust
Is oft a widow; when I married you,
I lost the name of maid to gain a title
Aboue the wish of change, which that part can
Only maintain, is still the same in man,
His virtue and his calm society,
Which no gray hairs can threaten to dissolve,
Nor wrinkles bury.
Confine thy self to silence, lest thou take
That part of reason from me is only left
To give persuasion to me, I am a man:
Or say thou hast never seen the rivers haste
With glad-some speed to meet the amorous sea.
We are but to praise the coolness of their streams.
Nor viewed the kids taught by their lustful sires,
Pursue each other through the wanton lawns,
And liked the sport.
As it made way unto their envied rest,
With weary knots binding their harmless eyes.
Nor do you know the reason why the dove,
One of the pair your hands wont hourly feed,
So often clipped and kissed her happy mate.
Unless it were to welcome his wished sight,
Whose absence only gave her mourning voice.
And you could douelike to a single object
Bind your loose spirits to one, nay such a one
Whom only eyes and ears must flatter good,
Your surer sense made useless, my self, nay
As in my all of good already known.
Let proof plead for me, let me be mewed up
Where never eye may reach me but your own;
And when I shall repent, but in my looks, if sigh,
Or shed a tear that's warm.
But in your sadness.
Or when you hear the birds call for their mates,
Ask if it be St. Valentine, their coopling day.
If any thing may make a though suspected,
Of knowing any happiness but you,
Divorce me by the title of most falsehood.
Oh who would know a wife, that might have such a friend?
Posterity henceforth lose the name of blessing,
And leave the earth inhabited to people heaven.
All happiness to Thierry, and Ordella.
It is a desire but borrowde from me, my happiness
Shall be the period of all good men's wishes,
Which friends, nay dying fathers shall be queath,
And in my one give all: is there a duty
Belongs to any power of mine, or love
To any virtue I have right to? here, place it here,
Ordellas name shall only bear command,
Rule, title, sovereignty.
What passion sways my son?
O mother, she has doubled every good
The travail of your blood made possible
To my glad being.
He should have done
Little to her, he is so light hearted.
Brother, friends, if honour unto shame,
If wealth to want in large the present sense,
My joys are unbounded, instead of question
Let it be envy, not bring a present
To the high offering of our mirth, banquets, and masks;
Keep waking our delights, mocking nights malice,
Whose dark brow would fright pleasure from vs,
Our court be but one stage of Revels, and each eye
The scene where our content moves.
There shall want
Nothing to express our shares in your delight Sir.
Till now I ne'er repented the estate
Of widower.
Musique, why art thou so slow voycte? it stays thy presence
My Ordella, this chamber is a sphere
Too narrow for thy al-mouing virtue.
Make way, free way I say;
Who must alone, her sexes want supply,
Had need to have a room both large and high.
This passion's aboue utterance.
Nay credulity.
Why son what mean you, are you a man?
No mother I am no man, were I a man,
How could I be thus happy?
How can a wife be author of this joy then?
That being no man, I am married to no woman;
The best of men in full ability,
Can only hope to satisfy a wife,
And for that hope ridiculous, I in my want
And such defective poverty, that to her bed
From my first cradell brought no strength but thought,
Have met a temperance beyond hers that rocked me,
Necessity being her bar; where this
Is so much senseless of my deprived fire,
She knows it not a loss by her desire.
It is beyond my admiration.
Beyond your sexes faith,
The unripe virgins of our age to hear't
Will dream themselves to women, and convert
The example to a miracle.
Alas it is your defect moves my amazement,
But what ill can be separate from ambition?
Cruel Theodoret.
What of my brother?
That to his name your barrenness adds rule;
Who loving the effect, would not be strange
In favouring the cause; look on the profit,
And gain will quickly point the mischief out.
The name of father to what I possess
Is shame and care.
Were we begot to single happiness
I grant you; but from such a wise, such virtue
To get an heir, what Hermit would not find
Deserving argument to break his vow
Even in his age of chastity?
You teach a deaf man language.
The cause found out, the malady may cease,
Have you heard of one Forts?
A learned Astronomer, great Magician,
Who lives hard-by retired.
Repair to him, with the just hour and place
Of your nativity; fools are amazed at fate,
Griefs but concealed are never desperate.
You have timely wakende me, nor shall I sleep
Without the satisfaction of his art.
Wisdom prepares you to it, Leisure, met happily.
The ground answers your purpose, the conveyance
Being secure and easy, falling just
Behind the state set for Theodoret.
It is well, your trust invites you to a second charge,
You know Lefortes cell.
Who constellated your fair birth.
Enough, I see thou know him, whore's Bawdber?
I left him careful of the project cast,
To raise Protaldies credit.
A sore that must be plasterde, in whose wound
Others shall find their graves, think themselves sound,
Your care, and quickest apprehension.
This man of war will advance.
His hours upon the stroke.
Wind him back as you favour my ears,
I love no noise in my head, my brains have hitherto
Bin employed in silent businesses.
The gentleman is within your reach Sir.
Give ground whilst I drill my wits to the encounter,
Deuitry. I take it.
All that's left of him.
Is there another parcel of you, if it be at pawn
I will gladly redeem it to make you wholly mine.
You seek too hard a penywoth.
You to ill to keep such distance, your parts have bin long known
To me, howsoever you please to forget acquaintance.
I must confess I have bin subject to lewd company.
Thanks for your good remembrance,
You have bin a soldier Deuitry, and borne arms.
A couple of unprofitable ones, that have only served to get me a stomach to my dinner.
Much good may it do you Sir.
You should have heard me say I had dined first, I have built on an unwholesome ground, raised up a house before I knew a Tenant, matched to meet weariness, fought to find want and hunger.
It is time you put up your sword, and run a way for meat sir, nay if I had not withdrawn ere now, I might have kept the; fast with you: but since the way to thrive is never late, what is the nearest course to profit think you?
It may be your worship will say bawdry.
True sense, bawdry.
Why is their five kinds of em, I never knew but one.
Isle show you a new way of prostitution, fall back, further yet, further, there is fifty crowns, do but as much to Protaldye the Queens favourite, they are doubled.
But thus much.
Give him but an affront as he comes to the presence, and in his drawing make way like a true bawd to his valour, the son's thy own; if you take a scratch in the arm or so, every drop of blood weighs down a ducats.
After that rate, I and my friends would beggar the kingdom. Sir you have made me blush to see my want, whose cure is such a cheap and easy purchase, this is male bawdery belike.
See, you shall not belong earning your wages, your worke's before your eyes.
Leave it to my handling, isle fall upon it instantly:
What opinion will the managing of this affair
Bring to my wisdom? my invention tickles
With apprehension on it:
These are the joys of marriage Lady,
Whose sights are able to dissolve virginity.
Speak freely, do you not envy the brides felicity?
How should I, being partner of't?
What you enjoy is but the banquets view,
The taste stands from your palate; if he impart
By day so much of his content, think what night gave?
Will you have a relish of wit Lady?
This is the man.
If it be not dear Sir.
If you affect cheapens, how can you prize this sullied ware so much? mine is fresh, my own, not retailde.
You are saucy sir.
The fitter to be in the dish with such dry stockfish as you
Are, how strike?
Remember the condition as you look for payment.
That box was left out of the bargain.
Help, help, help.
Plague of the scruiners running hand,
What a blow is this to my reputation?
What villain dares this outrage?
Here me Sir, this creature hired me with fifty crowns in hand, to let Protaldye have the better of me at single rapier on a made quarrel; he mistaking the weapon, lays me over the chops with his clubfist, for which I was bold to teach him the art of memory.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
Your General, mother, will display himself
Spite of our peace I see.
Forbear these civil jars, fie Protaldye,
So open in your proiects, avoid our presence sir.
Willingly, if you have any more wages to earn,
You see I can take pains.
There's somewhat for thy labour, more then was promised, ha, ha, ha:
Where could I wish my self now? in the Isle of dogs,
So I might scope scratching, for I see by her cats eyes
I shall be clawed fearfully.
Weal hear no more on it, musique drown al sadness; soft
Command the Revellers in, at what a rate I do purchase musique
My mothers absence, to give my spleen full liberty.
Speak not a thoughrs delay, it names thy ruin.
I had thought my life had borne more value with you.
Thy loss carries mine with it, let that secure thee,
The vault is ready, and the door conuyes too't,
Falls just behind his chair, the blow once given,
Thou art unseen.
I cannot feel more then I fear, ime sure. withdraws:
Be gone, and let them laugh their own destruction.
You will add unto her rage.
Foot I shall burst unless I vent my self, ha, ha, ha.
Me Sir, you never could
Have found a time to inuit more willingness,
In my dispose to pleasure.
Would you would please to make some other choice
It is a disgrace would dwell upon me Lady.
Should you refuse.
Your reason conquers; my grandmothers looks
Have turned all ayre to earth in me, they sit
Upon my heart like night charms, black and heavy. The Dance.
You are too much libertine.
The fortune of the fool petswades my laughter
More then his cowardice; was ever ratte
Tan by the tail thus? ha, ha, ha.
Forbear I say.
No eye looks this way, I will wink and Strike,
Behind the state stabe Theodoret.
Lest I betray my self.
Ha, did you not see one near me?
How near you, why do you look so pale brother?
Treason, treason.
Oh my presage! Father.
Brother.
Prince, noble Prince.
Make the gates sure, search into every angle
And corner of the court; oh my shame! mother,
Your son is slain, Theodoret, noble Theodoret,
Here in my arms, too weak a sanctuary
Against treachery and murder, say is the traitor taken.
No man has past the chamber on my life Sir.
Set present fire unto the place, that all unseen
May perish in this mischief who moves slow to it,
Shall add unto the flame.
What mean you? give me your private hearing.
Persuasion is a partner in the crime,
I will renounce my claim unto a mother,
If you make offer on it.
Ere a torch can take flame, I will produce
The author of the fact.
Withdraw but for your ilghts.
Oh my too true suspicion?
Martell, Memberge.
Speak, whore's the engine to this horrid act?
Here, you do behold her, upon whom make good
Your causeless rage; the deed was done by my incitement,
Not yet repented.
Whither did nature start, when you conceived
A birth so unlike woman? say, what part
Did not consent to make a son of him,
Reserved it self within you to his ruin.
Ha, ha, a son of mine! do not dissever
Thy fathers dust, shaking his quiet urn,
To which thy breath would send so soul an issue,
My son, thy brother?
Was not Theodoret my brother, or is thy tongue
Confederate with thy hart, to speak and do
Only things monstrous?
Hear me, and thou shalt make thine own belief,
Thy still with sorrow mentionde, father lived
Three careful years in hope of wished heirs,
When I conceived, being from his jealous fear
Enioynde to quiet home, one fatal day:
Transported with my pleasure to the chase,
I forced command, and in pursuit of game
Fell from my horse, lost both my child and hopes.
Despair which only in his love saw life
Worthy of being, from a gardeners arms
Snatched this vn'ucky brat, and called it mine,
When the next year repaid my loss with thee:
But in thy wrongs preserved my misery,
Which that I might diminish though not end,
My sighs and wet eyes, from thy fathers will,
Bequeath this largest part of his dominions
Of France unto thee, and only left
Austracia unto that changeling, whose life affords
Too much of ill against me to prove my words
And call him stranger.
Come, do not weep, I must, nay, do believe you,
And in my fathers satisfaction count it
Merit, not wrong, or loss:
You do but flatter, there's anger yet flames
In your eyes.
See, I will quench it, and confess that you
Have suffered double travail for me.
You will not fire the house then?
Rather reward the author, who gave cause
Of knowing such a secret, my oath and duty
Shall be assurance on it.
Protaldye, rise good faithful servant, heaven knows
How hardly he was drawn to this attempt.
Protaldye? he had a gardeners fate i'll swear
Fell by thy hand, Sir, we do owe unto you for this service.
Why look thou so dejected?
I want a little shift Lady, nothing else.
The fires are ready, please it your grace withdraw,
Whilst we perform your pleasure.
Reserve them for the body; since he had the fate
To live and die a Prince, he shall not lose
The title in his funeral.
His fate to live a Prince,
Thou old impiety, made up by lust and mischief,
Take up the body.
Doest think Lefortes sure enough?
As bonds can make him, I have turned his eyes to the east; and left him gaping after the morning star, his head is a mere Astrolobe, his eyes stand for the poles, the gag in his mouth being the coachman, his five teeth have the nearest re???semblance to Charles Wane.
Thou hast cast a figure which shall raise thee, direct my hair a little; and in my likeness to him read a fortune suiting thy largest hopes.
You are so far Above likeness you are the same,
If you love mirth, persuade him from himself,
It is but an Astronomer out of the way,
And lying will bear the better place for it.
I have profitabler use in hand, hast to the Queen,
And tell her how you left me changed.
Who would not serve this virtuous active Queen?
She that loves mischief above the man that does it,
And him aboue her pleasure, yet knows no heaven else:
How well this loanes suits the art I seek,
Discoueting secret and succeeding fate,
Knowledge that puts all lower happiness on,
With a remiss and careless hand,
Fair peace unto your meditations father.
The same to you, you bring Sir.
Drawn by your much famed skill, I come to know
Whether the man who owes this character,
Shall ere have issue.
A resolution falling with most ease
Of any doubt you could have named, he is a Prince
Whose fortune you enquire.
He is nobly borne.
He had a dukedom lately fallen unto him
By one called brother, who has left a daughter.
The question is ofheires, not lands.
Heirs, yes he shall have heirs.
Begotten of his body, why look thou pale?
Thou can not suffer in his want.
Nor thou, I neither can nor will
Give farther knowledge to thee.
Thou must, I am the man my self,
Thy sovereign, who must owe unto thy wisdom
In the concealing of my barren shame.
Your grace doth wrong your stars; if this be yours,
You may have children.
Speak it again.
You may have fruitful issue.
By whom? when? how?
It was the fatal means first struck my blood
With the cold hand of wonder, when I read it,
Printed upon your birth.
Can there be any way vnsmooth, has end
So fair and good?
We that behold the sad aspects of heaven,
Leading sense blinded, men feel griese enough
To know, though not to speak their miseries.
Sorrow must lose a name, where mine finds life,
If not in thee, at least ease pain with speed,
Which must know no cure else.
Then thus,
The first of femalls which your eye shall meet
Before the sun next rise, coming from out
The Temple of Diana, being slain, you live
Father of many sons.
Call thou this sadness, can I beget a son
Deserving less then to gin recompense
Unto so poor a loss? what ear thou art,
Rest peaceable blessed creature, borne to be
Mother of Princes, whose grave shall be more fruitful
Then others marriage bends: me thinks his art
Should give her form and happy figure to me,
I long to see my happiness; he is gone,
As I remember he named my brothers daughter,
Were it my mother, 't were a gainful death
Could give Ordellas virtue living breath.
Your grace is early stirring.
How can he sleep,
Whose happiness is laid up in an hour.
Hee knows comes stealing toward him, o Martell!
I'st possible the longing bride, whose wishes
Outruns her fears, can on that day she is married
Consume in slumbers, or his arms rust in ease,
That hears the charge, and sees the honoured purchase
Ready to gild his valour? Mine is more
A power aboue these passions; this day France,
France that in want of issue withers with vs;
And like an aged river runs his head
Into forgotten ways, again I ransom,
And his fair course turn right: this day, Thierry,
The son of France, whose manly powers like prisoners
Have bin tied up, and fettered, by one death
Give life to thousand ages; this day beauty
The envy of the world, pleasure the glory,
Content aboue the world, desire beyond it
Are made mine own and useful.
Happy woman
That dies to do these things.
But ten times happier
That lives to do the greater; o Martell,
The gods have hard me now, and those that scorned me
Mothers of many children, and biest fathers
That see their issues like the stars vnnumber'd,
Their comfort more then them, shall in my praises
Now teach their infants songs; and tell their ages
From such a son of mine, or such a queen,
That chaste Ordella brings me blessed marriage,
The chain that links two holy loves together,
And in thee marriage, more then blessed Ordella,
That comes so ne'er the sacrament it self,
The Priests doubt whether purer.
Sir, year'lost.
I prithee let me be so,
The day wears;
And those that have bin offering early prayers,
Are now retiring homeward.
Stand and mark then,
Is it the first must suffer.
The first woman.
What hand shall do it Sir?
This hand Martell,
For who less dare presume to give the gods
An incense of this offering?
Would I were she,
For such a way to die, and such a blessing
Can never crown my parting.
What are those?
Men, men Sir, men.
The plagues of men light on um,
They cross my hopes like hares, who's that?
a Priest Sir.
Would he were gilt:
May not these rascals serve Sir,
Well hanged and quartered?
No.
Here comes a woman:
Stand and behold her then.
I think a fair one.
Move not whilst I prepare her: may her peace
Like his whose innocence the gods are pleased with,
And offering at their altars, gives his soul
Far purer then those fires; pull heaven upon her,
You holy powers, no humane spot dwell in her,
No love of any thing but you and goodness,
Tie her to earth, fear be a stranger to her,
And all weak bloods affections, but thy hope
Let her bequeath to women: hear me heaven,
Give her a spirit masculine, and noble,
Fit for your selfes to ask, and me to offer.
O let her meet my blow, dote on her death;
And as a wanton yen bows to the pruner,
That by his cutting off more may increase,
So let her fall to raise me fruit; hail woman,
The happiest, and the best (if thy dull will
Do not abuse thy fortune) France ere found yet.
She is more then dull Sir, less and worse then woman,
That may inherit such an infinite
As you propound, a greatness so near goodness;
And brings a will to rob her.
Tell me this then,
Was there ere woman yet, or may be found,
That for fair fame, unspotted memory,
For virtues sake, and only for it self sake
Has, or dare make a story?
Many dead Sir,
Living I think as many:
Say, the kingdom
May from a women's will receive a blessing,
The king and kingdom, not a private safety.
A general blessing Lady.
A general curse
Light on her hart denies it.
Full of honour;
And such examples as the former ages
Were but dim shadows of, and empty figures:
You strangely stir me Sir, and were my weakness
In any other flesh but modest women's,
You should not ask more questions, may I do it?
You may, and which is more, you must.
I joy in it,
Aboue a moderate gladness, Sir, you promise
It shall be honest.
As ever time discovered.
Let it be what it may then, what it dare,
I have a mind will hazarde'it.
But hark ye,
What may that woman merit, makes this blessing?
Only her duty Sir.
It is terrible.
It is so much the more noble.
It is full of fearful shadows.
So is sleep Sir,
Or anything that's merely ours and mortal,
We were begotten gods else; but those fears
Feeling but once the fires of nobler thoughts,
Fly like the shapes of clouds we form to nothing.
Suppose it death.
I do.
And endless parting
With all we can call ours, with all our sweetness,
With youth, strength, pleasure, people, time, nay reason:
For in the silent grave, no conversation,
No joyful tread of friends, no voice of lovers,
No careful fathers counsel, nothing's hard,
Nor nothing is, but all oblivion,
Dust, and an endless darkness; and dare you woman
Desire this place?
It is of all sleeps the sweetest,
Children begin it to vs, strong men seek it,
And kings from height of all their painted glories
Fall, like spent exhalations, to this center;
And those are fools that fear it, or imagine
A few unhandsome pleasures, or lifes profits
Can recompense this place; and mad that stays it,
Till age blow out their lights, or rotten humours,
Bring um despers'd to the earth.
Then you can suffer.
As willingly as say it.
Martell, a wonder,
Here is a woman that dares die, yet tel me,
Are you a wife?
I am Sir.
And have children,---
She sighs, and weeps.
O none Sir.
Dare you venture,
For a poor barren praise you ne'er shall hear,
To part with these sweet hopes?
With all but heaven;
And yet die full of children; he that reads me
When I am ashes, is my son in wishes,
And those chaste dames that keep my memory,
Singing my yearly requiems, are my daughters.
Then there is nothing wanting but my knowledge;
And what I must do Lady.
You are the king Sir,
And what you do i'll suffer, and that blessing
That you desire the gods shower on the kingdom.
Thus much before I strike then, for I must kill you,
The gods have willed it so; they are made the blessing
Must make France young again, and me a man,
Keep up your strength still nobly.
Fear me not.
And meet death like a measure:
I am steadfast.
Thou shalt be sainted woman, and thy tomb
Cut out in Crystal, pure and good as thou art;
And on it shall be graven every age,
Succeeding peers of France that rise by thy fall,
Tell thou least there like old and fruitful nature.
Dare thou behold thy happiness?
I Dare Sir.
Ha? Pulls off her voice, lets fall his sword.
O Sir, you must not do it.
No, I dare not,
There is an Angel keeps that paradise,
A fiery angel friend; o virtue, virtue,
Ever and endless virtue.
Strike Sir, strike;
And if in my poor death fair France may merit,
Give me a thousand blows, be killing me
A thousand days.
First let the earth be barren,
And man no more remembered; rise Ordella,
The nearest to thy maker, and the purest
That ever dull flesh showed vs, ----- o my hart-strings.
I see you full of wonder, therefore noblest
And truest amongst women, I will tell you
The end of this strange accident.
Amazement
Has so much woven upon my hart, that truly
I feel my self unfit to hear, o Sir,
My Lord has slighted me.
O no sweet Lady.
Robbed me of such a glory by his pity
And most unprovident respect.
Dear Lady,
It was not meant to you.
Else where the day is,
And hours distinguish time, time runs to ages,
And ages end the world, I had bin spoken.
I'll tell you what it was, if but your patience
Will give me hearing.
If I have transgressed,
Forgive me Sir.
Your noble Lord was counselled,
Grieving the barrenness between you both,
And all the kingdom with him, to seek out
A man that knew the secrets of the gods,
He went, found such a one, and had this answer,
That if he wooed have issue, on this morning
For this hour was prefixed him, he should kill
The first he met being female, from the Temple;
And then he should have children, the mistake
Is now to perfect Lady.
Still it is I Sir,
For may this work be done by common women,
Durst any but my self that knew the blessing,
And felt the benefit, assume this dying,
In any other, t'ad bin lost, and nothing,
A curse, and not a blessing; I was figured;
And shall a little fondness bar my purchase?
Where should he then seek children?
Where they are
In wombs ordained for issues, in those beauties
That bless a marriage bed, and makes it proceed
With kisses that conceive, and fruitful pleasures;
Mine like a grave, buries those loyal hopes,
And to a grave it covets.
You are too good,
Too excellent, too honest; rob not vs
And those that shall hereafter seek example,
Of such inestimable worthies in woman,
Your Lord of such obedience, all of honour
In coveting a cruelty is not yours,
A will short of your wisdom; make not error
A tombestone of your virtues, whose fair life
Deserves a constellation: your Lord dare not,
He cannot, ought not, must not run this hazard,
He makes a separation nature shakes at,
The gods deny, and everlasting justice
Shrinks back and sheathes her sword at.
Ell's but talk Sir,
I find to what I am reserved, and needful,
And though my Lords compassion makes me poor
And leaves me in my best use, yet a strength
Aboue mine own, or his dull fondness finds me,
The gods have given it to me. draws a knife.
Self destruction,
Now all good angels bless thee, o sweet Lady
You are abused, this is a way to shame you,
And with you al that knows you, al that loves you,
To ruin all you build, would you be famous,
Is that your end?
I would be what I should be.
Live, and confirm the gods then, live and be laden
With more then olives bear, or fruitful Autum;
This way you kill your merit, kill your cause,
And him you would raise life to; where, or how
Got you these bloody thonghts? what devil durst
Look on that Angel face, and tempt? do you know
What'tis to die thus, how you strike the stars,
And all good things aboue? do you feel
What follows a self blood, whither you venture,
And to what punishment? excellent Lady,
Be not thus cozened, do not fool your self,
The priest was never his own sacrifice,
But he that thought his hell here.
I am counselled.
And I am glad on it, lie I know you dare not.
I never have done yet.
Pray take my comsort,
Was this a soul to lose? two more such women
Would save their sex; see, she repents and prays,
O hear her, hear her, if there be a faith
Able to reach your mercies, she hath sent it.
Now good Martell confirm me.
I will Lady,
And every hour advise you, for I doubt
Whether this plot be heavens, or hells; your mother
And I will find it, if it be in mankind
To search the center of it: in the mean time
I'll give you out for dead, and by your self,
And show the instrument, so shall I find
A joy that will betray her.
Do what's finest;
And I will follow you.
Then ever live
Both able to in gross all love, and give.
I am in labour
To be delivered of that burdenous project
Thaue so iong gone with; ha? here's the mid-wife,
Or life, or death:
If in the supposition
Of her death in whose life you die, you ask me,
I think you are safe.
Is she dead?
I have used
All means to make her so, I saw him waiting
At the Temple door, and used such art within,
That only she of all her sex, was first
Given up unto his fury.
Which if love
Or fear made him forbear to execute
The vengeance he determinde, his fond pity,
Shall draw it on himself: for were there left
Not any man but he to serve my pleasures,
Or from me to receive commands, which are
The joys for which I love life; he should be
Remote, and I alone left to be Queen
O'er any part of goodness that's left in me.
If you are so resolude, I have provided
A means to ship him hence: look upon this,
But touch it sparingly, for this once used,
Say but to dry a tear, will keep the eyelidde
From closing, until death perform that office.
Giue't me, I may have use of't, and on you
I'll make the first experiment: if one sigh
Or heavy look beget the least suspicion,
Childish compassion can thaw the ice
Of your so long congealde and flinty hardness.
Slight, go on constant, or I shall.
Best Lady,
We have no faculties which are not yours.
Nor will be anything without you.
Be so,
And we will stand or fall together, for
Since we have gone so far, that death must stay
The journey which we wish should never end,
And innocent, or guilty we must die,
When we do so, let's know the reason why?
The King.
We will be alone.
I would I had
A convoy too, to bring me safe off,
For rage although it be allaide with sorrow,
Appears so dreadful in him, that I shake
To look upon it.
Coward, I will meet it
And know from whence it is b??????t: son, kingly Thierry.
Is cheating grown so common among men,
And thrives so well here, that the gods endeavour
To practice it aboue!
Your mother.
Ha! or are they only careful to revenge,
Not to reward? or when for your offences
We study satisfaction, must the cure
Be worse then the disease?
Will you not hear me?
To lose th'ability to perform those duties
For which I entertained the name of husband,
Asked more then common sorrow; but t'impose
For the redress of that defect, a torture
In marking her to death, for whom alone
I felt that weakness as a want, requires
More then the making the head bald? or falling
Thus flat upon the earth, or cursing that way,
Or praying this, oh such a scene of grief,
And so set down, (the world the stage to act on)
May challenge a Tragedian better practiced
Then I am to express it; for my cause
Of passion is so strong, and my performance
So weak, that though the part be good, I fear
The isle acting of it, will defraud it of
The poor reward it may deserve, men's pity.
I have given you way thus long, a King, and what
Is more, my son, and yet a slave to that
Which only triumphs over cowards sorrow
For shame look up.
I'st you, look down on me;
And if that you are capable to receive it,
Let that return to you, that have brought forth
One marked out only for it: what are these?
Come they upon your privilege, to tread on
The tomb of my afflictions?
No not we Sir.
How dare you then omit the ceremony
Due to the funeral of all my hopes,
Or come unto the marriage of my sorrows,
But in such colours as may sort with them?
Alas, we will wear any thing.
This is madnesle,
Take but my counsel.
Yours? dare you again
Though armed with the authority of a mother,
Attempt the danger, that will fall on you
If such another syllable awake it?
Go, and with yours be safe, I have such cause
Of grief, nay more, to love it, that I will not
Hane such as these be sharers in it.
Madam.
Another time were better.
Doe not stir,
For I must be resolude and will, be statues.
I, thou art welcome, and upon my soul
Thou art an honest man; do you see, he has tears
To lend to him whom prodigal expense
Of sorrow has made banker out of such treasure,
Nay thou doest well.
I would it might excuse
The ill I bring along.
Thou make me smile
In the height of my calamities, as if
There could be the addition of an Atom
To the giant body of my miseries.
But try, for I will hear thee; all sit down, it is death
To any that shall dare to interrupt him
Inlooke, gesture, or word.
And such attention
As is due to the last, and the best story
That ever was delivered, will become you.
The grieude Ordella, (for all other titles
But take away from that) having from me
Prompted by your last parting groan, enquired
What drew it from you, and the cause soon learned:
For she whom barbarism could deny nothing,
With such prevailing earnestness desired it,
It was not in me though it had bin my death,
To hide it from her; she I say, in whom
All was, that Athens, Rome, or warlike Sparta,
Have registered for good in their best women:
But nothing of their ill, knowing herself
Marked out (I know not by what power, but sure
A cruel one) to die, to give you children;
Having first with a settled countenance
Looked up to heaven, and then upon her self
(It being the next best object) and then smiled,
As if her joy in death to do you service,
Would break forth in despite of the much sorrow
She shout she had to leave you: and then taking
Me by the hand, this hand which I must ever
Love better then I have done, since she touched it,
Go, said she, to my Lord, (and to go to him
Is such a happiness I must not hope for,)
And tell him that he too much prized a trifle
Made only worthy in his love, and her
Thankful acceptance, for her sake to rob
The Orphan kingdom of such guardians, as
Must of necessity descend from him;
And therefore in some part of recompense
Of his much love, and to show to the world
That't was not her fault only, but her fate,
That did deny to let her be the mother
Of such most certain blessings: yet for proof,
She did not envy her, that happy her,
That is appointed to them, her quick end
Should make way for her; which no sooner spoke,
But in a moment this too ready engine
Made such a battery in the choicest castle
That ever nature made to defend life,
That strait it shook, and sunk.
Stay, dares any
Presume to shed a tear before me? or
Ascribe that worth unto themselves to merit
To do so for her? I have done, now on.
Fallen thus, once more she smiled, as if that death
For her had studied a new way to sever
The soul and body, without sense of pain;
And then tell him quoth she what you have seen??,
And with what willingness it was done: for which
My last request unto him is, that he
Would instantly make choice of one (most happy
In being so chosen) to supply my place,
By whom if heaven bless him with a daughter,
In my remembrance let it bear my name,
Which said she did.
I hear this, and yet live,
Hart art thou thunder proof, will nothing break thee?
She's dead, and what her entertainment may be
In the other world without me is uncertain,
And dare I stay here vnresolude?
Oh Sir!
Dear son:
Great King.
Vnhand me, am I fallen
So low, that I have lost the power to be
Disposer of my own life?
Be but pleased
To borrow so much time of sorrow, as
To call to mind her last request, for whom
(I must confess a loss beyond expression)
You turn your hand upon your self, it was hers
And dying hers, that you should live and happy
In seeing little models of your self,
By matching with another, and will you
Leave any thing that she desired vngranted?
And suffer such a life that was laid down
For your sake only to be fruitless?
Oh thou doest throw charms upon me, against which
I cannot stop my ears; bear witness heaven
That not desire of life, nor love of pleasures
Nor any future comforts, but to give
Peace to her blessed spirit in satisfying
Her last demand, makes me defer our meeting,
Which in my choice, and sudden choice shall be
To all apparent.
How? do I remove one mischief
To draw upon my head a greater?
Go, thou only good man, to whom for her self
Goodness is dear, and prepare to inter it
In her that was; o my hart! my Ordella,
A monument worthy to be the casket
Of such a jewel.
Your command that makes way
Unto my absence is a welcome one,
For but your self there's nothing here Martell
Can take delight to look on; yet some comfort
Goes back with me, to her, who though she want it,
Deserves all blessings.
So soon to forget
The loss of such a wife, believe?? it will
Be censurde in the world.
Pray you no more,
There is no argument you can use to cross it,
But does increase in me such a suspicion
I would not cherish, ---who's that?
One, no guard
Can put back from access, whose tongue no threats
Nor prayers can silence, a bold suitor and
For that which if you are your self, a King,
You were made so to grant it, Justice, Justice.
With what assurance dare you hope for that
Which is denied to me? or how can I
Stand bound to be just, unto such as are
Beneath me, that find none from those that are
Aboue me?
Their is justice, it were unfit
That any thing but vengeance should fall on him,
That by his giving way to more then murder,
(For my dear fathers death was parricide)
Makes it his own.
I charge you hear her not:
Hell cannot stop just prayers from entering heaven,
I must and will be heard, Sir; but remember
That he that by her plot fell, was your brother,
And the place where, your palace, against all
Th'inuiolable rites of hospitality,
Your word, a kings word, given up for his safety,
His innocence, his protection, and the gods
Bound to revenge the impious breach of such
So great and sacred bonds; and can you wonder,
(That in not punishing such a horrid murder,
You did it) that heavens favour is gone from you?
Which never will return until his blood
Be washde away in hers.
Drag hence the wretch.
Forbear: with what variety
Of torments do I meet? oh thou hast opende
A book in which writ down in bloody letters,
My conscience finds that I am worthy of
More then I undergo, but i'll begin
For my Ordellas sake, and for thine own,
To make less heavens great anger: thou hast lost
A father, I to thee am so; the hope
Of a good husband, in me have one; nor
Be fearful I am still no man, already
That weakness is gone from me,
That it might
Have ever grown insepurably upon thee, aside
What will you do? is such a thing as this
Worthy the loved Ordellas place, the daughter
Of a poor gardiner?
Your son,
The power
To take away that lowness is in me.
Stay yet, for rather then that thou shalt add
Incest unto thy other sins, I will
With hazard of my own life utter all.
Theodoret was thy brother.
You denied it
Upon your oath, nor will I now believe you,
Your Protean turnings cannot change my purpose.
And for me, be assured the means to be
Revenge on thee vile hag, admits no thought,
But what tends to it.
Is it come to that?
Then have at the last refuge; art thou grown
Insensible in ill, that thou goosed on
Without the least compunction? there, take that
To witness that thou had a mother, which
Foresaw thy cause of grief, and sad repentance,
That so soon after blessed Ordellas death
Without a tear thou can embrace another,
Forgetful man.
Mine eyes when she is named
Cannot forget their tribute, and your g????????????
Is not vnuseful now.
He's past all cure, that only touch is death.
This night i'll keep it,
Tomorrow I will send it you, and full of my affliction.
Is the poison mortal?
Aboue the help of physic.
To my wish.
Now for our own security, you Prosaldye
Shall this night post towards Austrachia,
With letters to Theodorets bastard son,
In which we will make known what for his rising
We have done to Thierry: no denial,
Nor no excuse in such acts must be thought of,
Which all dislike, and all again commend,
When they are brought unto a happy end.
No war, no money, no master; banished the Court, not trusted in the city, whipped out of the country, in what a triangle runs our misery: let me hear which of you has the best voice to beg in, for other hopes or fortunes I see you have not; bee not nice, nature provided you with tones for the purpose, the peoples charity was your heritage, and I would see which of you de???serves his birth-right.
We understand you not Captain.
You see this cardecu, the last and the only quintessence of 50 crowns, distilled in the lembicke of your gardage, of which happy piece thou shalt be treasurer: now hee that can soonest per???swade him to part with it, enjoys it, possesses it, and with it, me and my future countenance.
If they want art to persuade it, isle keep it my self.
So you be not a partial judge in your own cause, you shall.
Omnes. A marth:
I'll begin to you, brave Sir; bee proud to make him happy by your liberality, whose tongue vouchsafes now to petition was never heard before less then to command: I am a soldier by profession, a gentleman by birth, and an officer by place, whose poverty blushes to be the cause that so high a virtue should des???send to the pity of your charity.
In any case keep your high stile, it is not charity to shame any man, much less a virtue of your eminence, wherefore pre???serve your worth, and i'll preserve my money.
You persuade, you are shallow, give way to merit, ah by the bread of good man, thou hast a bonny countenance and a blithe, promising mickle good to a sicker womb, that has trod a long and a soar ground to meet with friends that will owe much to thy reverence, when they shall hear a thy tourtesie to their wandering countryman.
You that will use your friends so hardly to bring them in debt Sir, will deserve worse of a stranger, wherefore pead one, pead on I say.
It is the welch must do it I see, comrade man of vrship, St. Tauy bee her patron, the gods of the mountains keep her cow and her cupboard, may she never want the greene of the leek, nor the fat of the onion, if she part with her bounties to him that is a great deal away from her cozines, and has too big suites in law to recover her heritage.
Pardon me Sir, I will have nothing to do with your suites, it comes within the statute of maintenance: home to your coznes and sow garlic and hempeseede, the one will stop your hun???ger, the other end your suites, gammawash comrade, gammawash.
Foot he'll hoard all for himself.
Yes, let him; now comes my turn. i'll see if hee can an???swear me: save you Sir, they say you have that I want, money.
And that you are like to want, for ought I perceive yet.
Stand, deliver.
Foot what mean you you will not rob the Excheckor?
Do you prate?
Hold, hold, here captain.
Why I could have done this before you.
And I.
And I.
You have done this, brave man be proud to make him happy, by the bread of god man thou hast a bony countenance, comrade man of vrship, St. Tauy be her patron, out upon you, you vncurried colts, walking cans that have no souls in you, but a little rosin, to keep yonr ribs sweet, and hold in liquor.
Why, what would you have vs to do Captain?
Beg, beg, and keep Constables waking, wear out stocks and whipcord, mander for butter milk, die of the ian???dize, yet have the cure about you, lice, large lice, begot of your own dust, and the heate of the bricke-kills; may you statue, and fear of the gallows which is a gentle consumption too't, only prefer it; or may you fall upon your fear, and bee hanged for selling those purses to keep you from famine whose monies my valour empties, and bee cast without other evidence; here is my fort, my castle of defence, who comes by shall pay me toll, the first purse is your mittimus slaves.
The purse, foot we will share in the money Captain, if any come within a furlong of our fingers.
Did you doubt but wee could steal as well as your self, did not I speak welch?
We are thieves from our cradells, and will die so.
Then you will not beg again.
Yes, as you did, stand, and deliver.
Hark, here comes handsel, it is a trade quickly set up, and as soon cast down.
Have goodness in your minds varlets, and too't like men; he that has more money then we, cannot be our friend, and I hope there is no law for spoiling the enemy.
You need not instruct vs farther, your example pleads e???nough.
Disperse your selves, and as their company is, fall on.
Come, there are a band of em, i'll charge single.
It is wonderful dark, I have lost my man, and dare not call for him, lest I should have more followers then I would pay wages too; what throws am I in, in this travail? these bee hono???rabble adventures; had I that honest blood in my vcines again
Queen, that your feats and these frights have draind from me, honour should pull hard ere it drew me into these brakes.
Who goes there?
Hey ho, here's a pang of preferment.
Hart, who goes there?
He that has no hart to your acquaintance, what shall I do with my jewels, and my letter, my codpiece, that's to loose, good, my boots, who first that spoke to me, here's a friend?
We shall find that presently, stand, as you love safety stand.
That unlucky word of standing, has brought me to all this, hold or I shall never stand you.
I should know that voice, deliver.
All that I have is at your service gentlemen, and much good may it do you.
Zones down with him, do you prate?
Keep your first word as you are gentlemen, and let me stand, alas what do you mean?
To tie you to vs Sir, bind you in the knot of friendship.
Alas Sir, all the physic in Europe cannot bind me.
You should have jewels about you, stones, precious stones.
Captain away, there's company within hearing, if you stay longer we are surprised.
Let the devil come, i'll pillage this frigate a little better yet.
Foot we are lost, they are upon vs.
Ha, upon vs, make the least noise, it is thy parting gasp.
Which way shall she make Sir?
Every man his own; do you hear, only bind me be???fore you go, and when the companie's past, make to this place a???gain, this karuell should have better lading in him, you are slow, why do you not tie harder?
You are sure enough I warrant you Sir.
Darkness befriend you, away.
What Tyrants have I met with, they leave me alone in the dark; yet would not have me cry. I shall grow wondrous melancholy if I stay long here without company; I was wont to
get a nap with saying my prayers, isle see if they will work upon me now; but then if I should talk in my sleep, and they hear me, they would make a recorder of my windpipe, slit my throat: heaven be praised, I hear some noise, it may bee new purchase, and then I shall have fellows.
They are gone past hearing, now to task Deuitry, help, help, as you are men help, some charitable hand, relieve a poor distressed miserable wretch; thieves, wicked thieves have robed me, bound me.
Foot would they had gaged you too, your noise will betray vs, and fetch em again.
What blessed tongue spake to me, where, where are you Sir?
A plague of your bawling throat, we are well enough, if you have the grace to be thankful for it, do but snore to me, and it is as much as I desire, to pass away time with till morning, then talk as loud as you please Sir, I am bound not to stir, wherefore lie still and snore I say.
Then you have met with thieves too I see?
And desire to meet with no more of em.
Alas what can we suffer more? they are far enough by this time; have they not all, all that we have Sir?
No by my saith have they not Sir, I gave em one trick to boot, for their learning, my boots Sir, my boots, I have saved my stock, and my jewels in them, and therefore desire to hear no more of them.
Now blessing on your wit Sir, what a dull slave was I, dreamt not of your conveyance? help to unbind me Sir, and i'll undo you, my life for yours no worse these then my self meets you again this night.
Reach me thy hands.
Here Sir, here, I could beat my brains out, that could not think of boots, boots Sir, wide top boots, I shall love em the better whilst I live, but are you sure your jewels are here Sir?
Sure say thou? ha, ha, ha.
So ho, illo ho.
Within soldiers. Here Captain, here.
Foot what do you mean Sir?
A trick to boot ?????????
chase, purchase, the soul of the rock, diamonds, sparkling dia???monds.
I am betrayed, lost, past recovery lost, as you are men.
Nay Rooke, since you will be prating, we will share your carrion with you, have you any other conveyance now Sir?
Foot here are letters, epistles, familiar epistles, we will see what treasure is in them, they are sealed sure.
Gentlemen, as you are gentlemen spare my letters, and take all willingly, all: isle give you a release, a general release, and meet you here to morrow with as much more.
Nay, since you have your tricks, and your convey???ances, we will not leave a wrinkle of you unsearched.
Hark, there comes company, you will be betrayed, as you love your safeties beat out my brains, I shall betray you else.
Treason, unheard of treason, monstrous, monstrous villainies.
I confess my self a traitor, show your selves good sub???jests, and hang me up for it.
If it be treason, the discovery will get our pardon Captain.
Would we were all lost, hanged, quartered, to save this one, one innocent prince; Thierry's poisoned, by his mother poi???son'd, the Mistress to this stallion, who by that poison ne'er shall sleep again.
Foot let vs mince him by piecemeal, tell he eat himself up.
Let vs dig out his heart with needles, and half broil him, like a mussel.
Such another and I prevent you, my blood's settled al???ready.
Here's that shall remove it, toad, viper; drag him unto Martell, unnatural parricide, cruel, bloody wo???man.
On you dogfish, leech, caterpillar.
A longer sight of him will make my rage turn pity, and with his sudden end prevent revenge, and torture, wicked, wic???ked Brunbalt.
Not sleep at all no means.
I will assure you he can sleep no more
Then a hooded hawk, a sentinel to him,
Or one of the city Constables are tops.
How came he so?
They are too wise that dare know
Somethings amiss, heanen help all.
What cures has he? some with glisters.
Armies of those we call physicians,
Some with lattice caps, some posit drinks, some pills,
Twenty consulting here about a drench,
As many here to blood him;
Then comes a Don of Spain, and he prescribes
More cooling opium then would kill a turk,
Or quench a whore ith dogdayes; after him
A wise Italian, and he cries, tie unto him
A woman of fourscore, whose bones are marble,
Whose blood snow water, not so much heate about her
As may conceive a prayer: after him
An English Doctor, with a bunch of pot herbs;
And he cries out Endiffe and suckery,
With a few mallow roots and butter milk,
And talks of oil made of a churchmans charity,
Yet still he wakes.
But your good honour
Has a prayers in store if all should fail.
I could have prayed, and handsomely.
But age and an ill memory:
Has spoiled your primmer.
Yet if there be a man of faith in the Court,
And can pray for a pension.
Here's the King Sir,
And those that will pray without pay.
Then pray for me too.
How does your grace now feel your self?
What's that?
Nothing at all Sir, but your fancy:
Tell me,
Can ever these eyes more shut up in slumbers,
Assure my soul there in ?????????
And rest for humane labours? do not you
And all the world as I do, out stare time,
And live like funeral lamps never extinguished?
Is there a grave, and do not flatter me,
Nor fear to tell me truth, and in that grave
Is there a hope I shall sleep, can I die,
Are not my miseries immortal? o
The happiness of him that drinks his water
After his weary day, and sleeps for ever,
Why do you crucify me thus with faces,
And gaping strangely upon one another,
When shall I rest?
O Sir, be patient.
Am I not patient? have I not endured
More then a maingy dog among your dosses?
Am I not now your patient? ye can make
Unwholesome fools sleep for a guarded foote-cloth;
Whores for a hot sin offering; yet I must crave
That feed ye, and protect ye, and proclaim ye,
Because my power is far aboue your searching,
Are my diseases so? can ye cure none
But those of equal ignorance, dare ye kill me?
We do beseech your grace be more reclaimed,
This talk doth but distemper you.
Well, I will die
In spite of all your potlons; one of you sleep,
Lie down and sleep here, that I may behold
What blessed rest it is my eyes are robbed of:
See, he can sleep, sleep any where, sleep now,
When he that wakes for him can never slumber,
I'st not a dainty ease?
Your grace shall feel it.
O never I, never, the eyes of heaven
See but their certain motions, and then sleep,
The rages of the Ocean have their slumbers,
And quiet silver calms; each violence
Crowns in his end a peace, but my fixed fires
Shall never, never set, who's that?
No woman,
???1 line???
Ere thou shalt sleep, doest thou see him?
Yes, and curse him,
And all that love him fool, and all live by him.
Why art thou such a monster?
Why art thou
So tame a knave to ask me?
Hope of hell,
By this fair holy light, and all his wrongs
Which are aboue thy years, almost thy vices,
Thou shalt not rest, not feel more what is pity,
Know nothing necessary, meet no society,
But what shall curse and crucify thee, feel in thy self
Nothing but what thou art, bane, and bad conscience,
Till this man rest; but for whose reverence
Because thou art his mother, I would say
Whore, this shall be, do ye nod? isle waken ye
With my swords point.
I wish no more of heaven,
Nor hope no more, but a sufficient anger
To torture thee.
See, she that makes you see Sir,
And to your misery still see, your mother,
The mother of your woes Sir, of your waking,
The mother of your peoples cries, and curses,
Your murdering mother, your malicious mother:
Physicians, half my state to sleep an hour now;
Is it so mother?
Yes it is so son;
And were it yet again to do, it should be.
She nods again, swing her.
But mother,
For yet I love that reverence, and to death
Dare not forget you have bin so; was this,
This endless misery, this cureless malice,
This snatching from me all my youth together,
All that you made me for, and happy mothers
Crowned with eternal time are proud to finish,
Done by your will?
Brun. It was, and by that will.
O mother, do not lose your ?????????
It is all the soul of woman, all the sweetness;
Forget not I beseech you what are children,
Nor how you are groaned for um, to what love
They are borne inheritors, with what care kept,
And as they rise to ripeness still remember
How they imp our your age; and when time calls you,
That as an Autum flower you fall, forget not
How round about your hearse they hang like penons.
Holy fool,
Whose patience to prevent my wrongs has killed thee,
Preach not to me of punishments, or fears,
Or what I ought to be, but what I am,
A woman in her liberal will defeated,
In all her greatness crossed, in pleasure blasted,
My angers have bin laughed at, my ends slighted,
And all those glories that had crowned my fortunes.
Suffered by blasted virtue to be scattered,
I am the fruitful mother of these angers,
And what such have done, read, and know thy ruin.
Heaven forgive you.
She tells you true, for millions of her mischiefs
Are now apparent, Protaldye, we have taken
An equal agent with her, to whose care
After the damned defeat on you, she trusted
The bringing in of Leoner the bastard
Son to your murdered brother; her physician
By this time is attached to that damned devil.
It is like he will be so, for ere we came,
Fearing an equal justice for his mischiefs,
He drench't himself.
Hee did like one of mine thine.
Must I still see these miseries, no night
To hide me from their horrors, that Protaldye
See justice fall upon.
Now I could sleep too.
Isle give you yet more poppy, bring the Lady
And heaven in her embraces; give him quiet
Madam, vnuaile your self.
I do forgive you.
And though you sought my blood, yet isle pray for you,
Art thou alive?
Now could you sleep.
For ever.
Go carry her without wink of sleep, or quiet,
Where her strong knave Protaldye's broke oath wheel,
And let his cries and rores be music to her,
I mean to waken her.
Do her no wrong.
Nor right as you love justice.
I will think,
And if there be new curses in old nature,
I have a soul dare send um.
Keep her waking.
What's that appears so sweetly? there's that face.
Be moderate Lady.
That angels face.
Go nearer.
Martell, I cannot last long, see the soul,
I see it perfectly of my Ordella,
The heavenly figure of her sweetness there,
Forgive me gods, it comes, divinest substance,
Kneel, kneel, kneel every one, Saint of thy sex,
If it be for my cruelty thou come,
Do ye see her hoe?
Yes sir, and you shall know her.
Down, down again, to be revenged for blood,
Sweet spirit I am ready, she smiles on me,
O blessed sign of peace.
Go nearer Lady.
I come to make you happy.
Hear you that sirs?
She comes to crown my soul: away, get sacrifice
Whilst I with holy honours.
She's alive Sir.
In everlasting life I know it, friend,
O happy, happy soul.
Alas I live Sir
A mortal woman still.
Can spirits weep too?
She is no spirit Sir, pray kiss her; Lady;
Be very gentle to him.
Stay, she is warm.
Are you the same Ordella still?
The same Sir,
Whom heavens and my good angel staid from ruin.
Kiss me again,
The same still, still your servant.
It is she, I know her now Martell; sit down sweet,
O blessed and happiest woman, a dead slumber
Begins to creep upon me, o my jewel!
O sleep my Lord.
My joys are too much for me.
Brunhalt impatient of her constraint to see
Protaldie tortured, has choked her self.
No more, her sins go with her.
Love I must die, I faint, close up my glasses.
The Queen faints too, and deadly.
One dying kiss.
My last Sir, and my dearest, and now
Close my eyes too.
Thou perfect woman,
Martell, the kingdome's yours, take Memberge to you,
And keep my live alive; nay weep not Lady,
Take me, I go.
Take me too, farewell honour. dies both.
They are gone for ever.
The peace of happy souls go after um,
Bear um unto their last beds, whilst I study
A tomb to speak their loves; whilst old Time lasts,
I am your King in sorrows.
We your subjects.
Deuitry, for your service he near vs,
Whip out these instruments of this mad mother
From Court, and all good people; and because
She was borne noble, let that title find her
A private grave, but neither tongue, nor honour:
And now lead on, they that shall read this story,
Shall find that virtue lives in good, not glory.

