AWay with those bald pated Rascals there, their wits are bound up in vellum, they are not currant here. Down with those City-Gentlemen, &amp;c. Out with those — I say, and in with their wives at the back-door. Worship and place, I am weary of ye, ye lie on my shoulders like a load of gold on an Asses back. A man in Authority is but as a candle in the wind, sooner wasted or blown out then under a bushel. How now, what'ts the matter? 
Who are you, Sir?
Who am I, Sir? why, do y' not know me?
No by my — do I not.
I am sure we dined together to day.
That's all one: as I dined with you in the City, and as you paid for my dinner there, I do know you, and am beholding to you: But as my mind is since transmi∣grated into my office, and as you come to Court to have me pay you again, and be beholding to me, I know you not, I know you not.
Nay, but look ye Sir.
Pardon me: If you had been my bed-fellow these seven years, and lent me money to buy my place, I must not transgress principles: This very talking with you is an ill example.
Pish, you are too punctual a Courtier, Sir: why, I am a Courtier too, yet never understood the place or name to be so infectious to humanity and manners, as to cast a man into a burning pride and arrogance, for which there is no cure. I am a Courtier, and yet I will know my friends. I tell you.
And I tell you, you will thrive accordingly, I warrant you.
But hark ye, Seignior Frigozo, you shall first understand, I have no friends with me to trouble you.
Humh: That's a good motive.
Nor to borrow money of you.
That's an excellent motive.
No my sweet Don, nor to ask what you owe me.
Why, that is the very motive of motives: why I ought and will know thee: and if I had not wound thee up to this promise, I would not have known thee these fifteen years, no more then the errantest or most foe•derd Castillian that followed our new Q▪ carriages afoot.
Nor for any thing, deer Don, but that you would place me conveniently to see the Play to night.
That shall I, Seignior Rinaldo: but would you had come sooner: you see how full the Scaffolds are, there is scant room for a Lovers thought here. Gentlewomen, sit close for shame: Has none of ye a little corner for this Gentleman? I'll place ye, fear not. And how did our brave King of Portugal, Emanuel, bear himself to day? You saw the solemnity of the marriage.
Why, like a fit Husband for so gracious and ex∣cellent a Princess, as his worthy mate Isabella, the King of Castles Daughter doth in her very external lineaments, mixture of colours, and joining Dove-like behaviour assure her self to be. And I protest (my deer Don) seri∣ously, I can sing prophetically nothing but blessed hymns, and happy occasions to this sacred union of Portugal and Castle, which have so wisely and mutually conjoined two such virtuous and beautiful Princes as these are; and in all opinion like to multiply to their very last minute.
The King is entering: Seignior hover here about, and as soon as the Train is set, clap into me, we'll stand near the State. If you have any Creditors here, they shall renew bonds a Twelvemonth on such a sight: but to to touch the pommel of the Kings chair in the sight of a Citizen, is better security for 10 0 double ducats, then three of the best Merchants in Lisbon. Besides, Seignior, wee will censure not only the King in the Play here, that reigns his two hours; but the King himself, that is to rule his life time: Take my counsel: I have one word to say to this noble assembly, and I am for you.
Your method shall govern me.
Prologues are Hinshers bare before the wise;
Why may not then an Hinsher Prologize?
Here's a fair sight, and were ye oftner seen
Thus gathered here, it would please our King and Queen.
Ʋpon my conscience, ye are welcome all
To Lisbon, and the Court of Portugal;
Where your fair eyes shall feed on no worse sights
Then preparations made for Kings delights.
We wish to men content, the manliest treasure,
And to the women their own wished for pleasure,
Fair fountain of my life, from whose pure streams
the propagation of two Kingdom flows,
never contention rise in eiders breast,
but contestation whose love shall be best.
Majestic Ocean, that with plenty feeds
me thy poor tributary Rivulet,
Sun of my beauty, that with radiant beams
dost gild, and dance upon these humble streams,
cursed be my birth-hour, and my ending day,
when back your love-floods I forget to pay:
or if this breast of mine your crystal brook
ever take other form in, other look
but yours, or ere produce unto your grace
a strange reflection, or another face,
but be your love-book clasped, opened to none
but you, nor hold a story but your own;
a water fixed, that ebbs nor floods pursue,
frozen to all, only dissolved to you.
O, who shall tel the sweenesse of our love
to future times, and not be thought to lye?
I look through this hour like a perspective,
and far off see millions of prosperous seeds
that our reciprocal affection breeds.
Thus my white rib, close in my breast with me,
which nought shall tear hence but mortality. 
Be Kingdoms blessed in you, you blessed in them.
Whist, Seignior; my strong imagination shows me Love (me thinks) bathing in milk, and wine in her cheeks: O how she clips him like a plant of Ivy.
I; Could not you be content to be an owl in such an ivie-bush, or one of the oaks of the City to be so clipped?
Equivocal Don, though I like the clipping well, I could not be content either to be your owl, or your ox of the City. The Play begins. 
Low at your sacred feet our poor Muse lays
Her, and her thunder fearless verdant Baize.
Four several Triumphs to your Princely eyes
Of Honour, Love, Death, and Time do rise
From our approaching subject, which we move
Towards you with fear, since that a sweeter Love,
A brighter Honour, purer Chastity
March in your breasts this day triumphantly,
Then our weak Scenes can show: then how dare we
Present like Apes and Zanies, things that be
Exemplified in you, but that we know,
We ne'er craved grace, which you did not bestow?
What means proud Sophocles?
To go even with Martius,
and not to follow him like his Officer:
I never waited yet on any man.
Why poor Athenian Duke, thou art my slave,
my blows have conquered thee.
Thy slave? proud Martius,
Cato thy countrey-man (whose constancy
of all the Romans I did honour most)
rip'd himself twice to avoid slavery,
making himself his own Anatomy.
But look thee Martius, not a vein runs here
from head to foot, but Sophocles would unseame, and
like a spring garden shoot his scornful blood
itno their eyes durst come to tread on him:
As for thy brows, they did not conquer me:
Seven Battles have I met thee face to face,
and given thee blow for blow, and wound for wound,
and till thou taught me, knew not to retire;
thy sword was then as bold, thy arm as strong;
thy blows then Martius, cannot conquer me.
What is it then?
Fortune.
Why, yet in that
thou art the worse man, and must follow him.
Young Sir, you err: If Fortune could be called
or his, or yours, or mine, in good or evil
for any certain space, thou had spoke truth:
But she but jests with man, and in mischance
abhors all constancy, flouting him still
with some small touch of good, or seeming good
midst of his mischief: which vicissitude
makes him strait doff his armour and his fence
he had prepared before, to break her strokes.
So from the very Zenith of her wheel,
when she has dandled some choice favourite,
given him his boons in women, honour, wealth,
and all the various delicies of earth.
that the fool scorns the gods in his excess,
she whirls, and leaves him at the Antipodes.
Art sure we have taken him? Is this Sophocles?
his fettered arms say no; his free soul, I.
This Athens nurses Arts, as well as Arms.
Nor glory Martius, in this day of thine,
it is behind yesterday, but before to morrow:
Who knows what Fortune then will do with thee?
She never yet could make the better man
the better chance she has: the man that's best
she still contends with, and doth favour least.
Me thinks a graver thunder then the skies
breaks from his lips; I am amazed to hear,
and Athens words more then her swords doe fear.
Martius, slave Sophocles, could thou acquire
(and did thy Roman gods so love thy prayers,
and solemn sacrifice, to grant thy suit)
to gather all the valour of the Cesars
thy Predecessors, and what is to come,
and by their influence fling it on thee now,
thou could not make my mind go less, not pare
with all their swords one virtue from my soul:
how am I vassaled then? Make such thy slaves
as dare not keep their goodness past their graves.
Know General, we two are chances on
the die of Fate; now thrown, thy six is up,
and my poor one beneath thee; next thy throw
may set me upmost, and cast thee below.
Yet will I try thee more: Calamity
is mans true touchstone: Listen insolent Prince,
that dare contemn the Master of thy life,
which I will force here before thy City walls
with barbarous cruelty, and call thy wife
to see it, and then after send her—
Ha, ha, ha.
And then demolish Athens to the ground,
depopulate her, fright away her fame,
and leave succession neither stone nor name.
Ha, ha, ha.
Dost thou deride me?
Kneel, ask Martius
for mercy, Sophocles, and live happy still.
Kneel and ask mercy? (Roman) art a god?
I never kneeled, or begged of any else.
thou art a fool, and I will loose no more
instructions on thee: now I find thy ears
are foolish, like thy tongue. My Dorigen?
oh, must she see me bound?
There's the first sigh
he breathed since he was born, I think.
Forbear,
all but the Lady his wife.
How my heart chides
the manacles of my hands, that let them not
embrace my Dorigen.
Turn but thy face,
and ask thy life of Martius thus, and thou
(with thy fair wife) shalt live; Athens shall stand,
and all her privileges augmented be.
It were better Athens perished, and my wife
which (Romans) I do know a worthy one,
then Sophocles should shrink of Sophocles,
commit profane Idolatry, by giving
the reverence due to gods to thee blown man.
Rough, stubborn Cynic.
Thou art rougher far,
and of a couser wale, fuller of pride,
less temperate to bear prosperity.
Thou see my mere neglect hath raised in thee
a storm more boisterous then the Oceans,
my virtue Patience makes thee vicious.
Why, fair-ey'd Lady, do you kneel?
Great General,
victorious, godlike Martius, your poor handmaid
kneels, for her husband will not, cannot: speaks
thus humbly, that he may not. Listen Roman,
thou whose advanced front doth speak thee Roman
to every Nation, and whose deeds assure 't;
Behold a Princess (whose declining head
like to a drooping lily after storms
bows to thy feet) and playing here the slave,
to keep her husbands greatness unabated:
all which doth make thy Conquest greater: For,
if he be base in ought whom thou hast taken,
then Martius hath but taken a base prize.
But if this Jewel hold lustre and value,
Martius is richer then in that he hath won,
O make him such a Captive as thy self
unto another would, great Captain, be;
till then, he is no prisoner fit for thee.
Valerius, here is harmony would have brought
old crabbed Saturn to sweet sleep when Jove
did first incense him with Rebellion:
Athens doth make women Philosophers,
and sure their children chat the talk of gods.
Rise beauteous Dorigen.
Nor until I know
the Generals resolution,
One soft word
from Sophocles would calm him into tears,
like gentle showrs after tempestuous winds.
To buy the world, he will not give a word,
a look, a tear, a knee, against his own judgement,
and the divine composure of his mind:
all which I therefore doe, and here present
this Victors wreathe, this rich Athenian sword,
Trophies of Conquest, which, great Martius, wear,
and be appeased: Let Sophocles still live.
He would not live.
He would not beg to live.
When he shall so forget, then I begin
to command, Martius; and when he kneels,
Dorigen stands; when he lets fall a tear,
I dry mine eyes, and scorn him.
Scorn him now then,
here in the face of Athens, and thy friends.
Self-will'd, stiff Sophocles, prepare to die,
and by that sword thy Lady honoured me,
with which her self shall follow. Romans, Friends,
who dares but strike this stroke, shall part with me
half Athens, and my half of Victory.
By — not we.
We two will do it, Sir.
Away, ye fish-fac'd Rascals.
Martius,
to eclipse this great Eclipse labours thy fame;
Valerius thy Brother shall for once
turn Executioner: Give me the sword.
Now Sophocles, I'll strike as suddenly
as thou dare die.
Thou can not. And Valerius,
it is less dishonour to thee thus to kill me,
then bid me kneel to Martius: it is to murder
the fame of living men, which great ones do;
their studies strangle, poison makes away,
the wretched hangman only ends the Play.
Art thou prepared?
Yes.
Bid thy wife farewell.
No, I will take no leave: My Dorigen,
yonder above, about Ariadnes Crown
my spirit shall hover for thee; prithee haste,
Stay Sophocles, with this tie up my sight,
let not soft nature so transformed be
(and lose her gentler sex'd humanity)
to make me see my lord bleed. So, it is well:
never one object underneath the Sun
will I behold before my Sophocles.
Farewell: now teach the Romans how to die.
Dost know what it is to die?
Thou dost not, Martius,
and therefore not what it is to live; to die
is to begin to live: It is to end
an old stale weary work, and to commence
a newer and a better. It is to leave
deceitful knaves for the society
of gods and goodness. Thou thy self must part
at last from all thy garlands, pleasures, Triumphs,
and prove thy fortitude, what then twill do.
But art not grieved nor vexed to leave life thus?
Why should I grieve, or vex for being sent
to them I ever loved best? now I'll kneel,
but with my back toward thee; it is the last duty
this trunk can doe the gods.
Strike, strike, Valerius,
or Martius heart will leap out at his mouth.
This is a man, a woman! Kiss thy lord,
and live with all the freedom you were wont.
O Love, thou doubly hast afflicted me,
with virtue, and with beauty. Treacherous heart,
my hand shall cast thee quick into my urn,
ere thou transgress this knot of piety.
What ails my Brother?
Martius, oh Martius,
thou now hast found a way to conquer me.
O star of Rome, what gratitude can speak
fit words to follow such a deed as this?
Doth Juno talk, or Dorigen?
You are observed.
This admirable Duke (Valerius)
with his disdain of Fortune, and of Death,
captived himself, hath captivated me:
and though my arm hath taken his body here,
his soul hath subjugated Martius soul:
By Romulus, he is all soul, I think;
he hath no flesh, and spirit cannot be gived;
then we have vanqush'd nothing; he is free,
and Martius walks now in captivity.
How fares the noble Roman?
Why?
Your blood
is sunk down to your heart, and your bright eyes
have lost their splendour.
Baser fires go out
when the Sun shines on 'em: I am not well,
an Apoplectic fit I use to have
after my heats in war carelessly cooled.
Martius shall rest in Athens with his friends,
till this distemper leave him: O, great Roman,
see Sophocles doe that for thee, he could not
do for himself, weep. Martius, by the —
it grieves me that so brave a soul should suffer
under the bodies weak infirmity.
Sweet Lady, take him to thy loving charge,
and let thy care be tender.
Kingly Sir,
I am your Nurse and Servant.
Oh deer Lady,
my Mistress, nay my Deity; guide me heaven,
ten wreathes triumphant Martius will give
to change a Martius for a Sophocles:
Can 't not be done (Valerius) with this boot?
Inseparable affection, ever thus
colleague with Athens Rome.
Beat warlike tunes,
whilst Dorigen thus honours Martius brow
with one victorious wreath more.
And Sophocles
thus girds his Sword of Conquest to his thigh,
which ne'er be drawn, but cut out Victory.
For ever be it thus. 
Corporal Nichodemus, a word with you.
My worthy Sutler Cornelius, it befits not No∣chodemus the Roman Officer to parley with a fellow of thy rank: the affairs of the Empire are to be occu∣pied.
Let the affairs of the Empire lie a while unoccupied, sweet Nichodemus; I doe require the mo∣ney at thy hands, which thou doest owe me; and if fair means cannot attain, force of Arms shall accom∣plish.
Put up and live.
I have put up too much already, thou Cor∣porall of Concupiscence, for I suspect thou hast dis∣honoured my flock-bed, and with thy foolish Aloe∣quince, and that bewitching face of thine drawn my Wife, the young harlotry baggage to prosecute her self unto thee. Draw therefore, for thou shalt find thy self a mortal Corporal.
Stay thy dead-doing hand, and hear: I will rather descend from my honour, and argue these contumelies with thee, then clutch thee (poor fly) in these eaglet — of mine, or draw my sword of Fate on a Peasant, a Besognio, a Cocoloch, as thou art. Thou shalt first understand this foolish eloquence, and intolerable beauty of mine (both which, I protest, are merely natural) are the gifts of the gods, with which I have neither sent bawdy Sonnet, nor amorous glance, or (as the vulgar call it) sheeps eye to thy betrothed Florence.
Thou lie.
O gods of Rome, was Nichodemus born
to bear these braveries from a poor provant?
yet when dogs bark, or when the asses bray,
the lion laughs, not roars, but goes his way.
A — of your poetical vein: This versifying my wife has hornified me. Sweet Corporal codshead, no more standing on your punctilio's and pun∣ketto's of honour, they are not worth a louse: the truth is, thou art the Generals Bigamy, that is, his fool, and his knave; thou art miscreant and recreant, not an horse-boy in the Legions but has beaten thee; thy be∣ginning was knapsack, and thy ending will be halter-sack.
Me thinks I an now Sophocles the wise, and thou art Martius the mad.
No more of your tricks good Corporal Letherchops: I say, thou hast dishonoured me, and since honour now adays is only repaired by money, pay me, and I am satisfied; Even reckoning keeps long friends.
Let us continue friends then, for I have been even with thee a long time; and though I have not paid thee, I have paid thy wife.
Flow forth my tears, thou hast deflowered her Tarquin, the Garden of my delight, hedged about, in which there was but one bowling-Alley for mine own private procreation, thou hast, like a thief in the night, leaped the hedge, entered my Alley, and without my privy∣tie, plaid thine own rubbers.
How long shall patience thus securely snore?
Is it my fault, if these attractive eyes,
this budding chin, or rosie-colour'd cheek,
this comely body, and this waxen leg,
have drawn her into a fools paradise?
By Cupids — I do swear (no other)
she's chaster far then Lucrece, her grand-mother;
pure as glasse-window, ere the rider dash it,
whiter then Ladies smock, when she did wash it:
for well thou worst (though now my hearts Commandress)
I once was free, and she but the Camps Laundress.
I, she then came sweet to me; no part about her but smelt of Soap-suds, like a Dryad out of a wash-bowl. Pray, or pay.
Hold.
Was thy cheese mouldy, or thy peny-worths small?
was not thy Ale the mightiest of the earth in Malt,
and thy stope filled like a tide? was not thy bed soft, and
thy Bacon fatter then a dropsy? Come, Sir.
Mars then inspire me with the fencing skill
of our Tragedian Actors. Honour pricks;
and Sutler, now I come with thwacks and thwicks.
Grant us one crush, one pass, and now a high, Cavalto fall:
then up again, now down again, yet do no harm at all.
O that ever I was born: why Gent.
Mescaline of Rome, away, disloyal Concubine: I will be deafer to thee, then thou art to others: I will have my hundred drachma's he owes me, thou arrant whore.
I know he is an hundred drachmas of the score; but what of that? no bloodshed, sweet Cornelius. O my heart; of my conscience 't is fallen thorough the bottom of my belly. O my sweet Didimus, if either of ye miskil one another, what will become of poor Florence? Paci∣fie your selves, I pray.
Go to, my heart is not stone; I am not marble: dry your eyes, Florence; the scurvy apes-face knows my blind side well enough: leave your puling; will this content ye? let him taste thy nether lip, which in sign of amity I thus take off again: go thy ways, and provide the Cows udder.
Lily of Concord. And now, honest Sutler, since I have had proof as well of thy good nature, as of thy wives before, I will acquaint thee with a project shall fully satisfy thee for thy debt. Thou shalt understand I am shortly to be knighted.
The devil thou art.
Renounce me else: for the sustenance of which Worship (which Worship many times wants sustenance) I have here the Generals grant to have the leading of two hundred men.
You jest, you jest.
Refuse me else to the pit.
Mercy on us: have you not forgot your self? by your swearing you should be knighted already.
Damn me, Sir, here's his hand, read it.
Alas, I cannot.
I know that. It has pleased the General to look upon my service. Now, Sir, shall you join with me in petitioning for fifty men more, in regard of my arrearages to you; which if grant∣ed, I will bestow the whole profit of those fifty men on thee and thine heirs for ever, till Atropos do cut this simon∣ple thread.
No more, dear Corporal, Sir Nichodemus that shall be, I cry your wishes mercy: I am your servant, by∣die and goods, movables and immoveables; use my house, use my wife, use me, abuse me, do what you list.
A figment is a candid lye: this is an old Pass.
Mark what follows.
Pray leave me: you are Romans, honest men,
keep me not company, I am turned knave,
have lost my fame and nature. Athens, Athens,
this Dorigen is thy Palladium:
he that will sack thee, must betray her first,
whose words wound deeper then her husbands sword;
her eyes make captive still the Conqueror,
and here they keep her only to that end.
O subtle devil, what a golden ball
did tempt when thou did cast her in my way▪
Why, foolish Sophocles, broughtst thou not to field
thy Lady, that thou might have overcome?
Martius had kneeled, and yielded all his wreathes
that hang like Jewels on the seven-fold hill,
and bid Rome send him out to fight with men,
(for that she knew he durst) and not against Fate
or Deities, what mortal conquers them?
Insatiate Julius, when his Victories
had run ore half the world, had he met her,
there he had stopped the legend of his deeds,
laid by his Arms, been overcome himself,
and let her vanquish the other half. And fame
made beauteous Dorigen the greater name.
Shall I thus fall? I will not; no, my tears
cast on my heart, shall quench these lawless fires:
he conquers best, conquers his lewd desires.
Great Sir, my Lord commands me visit you,
and thinks your retired melancholy proceeds
from some distaste of worthless entertainment.
Will 't please you take your chamber? how d' ye do, Sir?
Lost, lost again; the wilde rage of my blood
doth Ocean-like oreflow the shallow shore
of my weak virtue: my desire 's a vane
that the least breath from her turns every way.
What says my Lord?
Dismiss your women, pray,
and I'll reveal my grief.
Leave me.
Long tales of love (whilst love it self
might be enjoyed) are languishing delays.
There is a secret strange lies in my breast
I will partake with you, which much concerns
your Lord, your self, and me. Oh!
Strange secrets, Sir,
should not be made so cheap to strangers: yet
if your strange secret do no lower lie
then in your breast, discover it.
I will.
Oh: can you not see it, Lady, in my sighs?
Sighs none can paint, and therefore who can see?
Scorn me not, Dorigen, with mocks: Alcides,
that mastered monsters, was by beauty tamed,
Omphale smiled his club out of his hand,
and made him spin her smocks. O sweet, I love you,
and I love Sophocles: I must enjoy you,
and yet I would not injure him.
Let go;
you hurt me, Sir: fare well. Stay, is this Martius?
I will not tell my Lord; he'll swear I lye.
doubt my fidelity, before thy honour.
How hast thou vexed the gods, that they would let thee
thus violate friendship, hospitality,
and all the bounds of sacred piety?
Sure thou but tri'st me out of love to him,
and would reject me, if I did consent.
O Martius, Martius, would thou in one minute,
blast all thy Laurels, which so many years
thou hast been purchasing with blood and sweat?
Hath Dorigen never been written, read,
without the epithet of chaste, chaste Dorigen?
and would thou fall upon her chastity,
like a black drop of ink, to blot it out?
When men shall read the records of thy valour,
thy hitherto brave virtue, and approach
(highly content yet) to this foul assault
included in this leaf, this ominous leaf,
they shall throw down the Book, and read no more,
though the best deeds ensue, and all conclude,
that ravell'd the whole story, whose sound heart
(which should have been) proved the most leprous part.
O thou confut'st divinely, and thy words
do fall like rods upon me; but they have
such silken lines, and silver hooks, that I
am faster snar'd: my love, h' as taken such hold,
that (like two wrestlers) though thou stronger be,
and hast cast me, I hope to pull thee after.
I must, or perish.
Perish, Martius, then;
for I here vow unto the gods, These rocks,
these rocks we see so fixed, shall be removed,
made champion field, ere I so impious prove,
to stain my Lords bed with adulterous love.
The gods protect fair Dorigen.
Amen,
from all you wolfish Romans. 
Ha? what 's this?
still, brother, in your moods? O then my doubts
are truths. Have at it: I must try a way
to be resolved.
How strangely dost thou look? what ailst thou?
What ailst thou?
Why, I am mad.
Why, I am madder. Martius, draw thy sword,
and lop a villain from the earth; for if
thou wilt not, on some tree about this place
I'll hang my self: Valerius shall not live
to wound his brothers honour, stain his Country,
and branded with ingratitude to all times.
For what can all this be?
I am in love.
Why so am I. With whom? ha?
Dorigen.
With Dorigen? how dost thou love her? speak.
Even to the height of lust; and I must have her,
or else I die.
Thou shalt, thou daring Traitor.
On all the confines I have rid my horse,
was there no other woman for thy choice
but Dorigen? Why, villain, she is mine;
she makes me pine thus, sullen, mad, and sool;
't is I must have her, or I die.
O all ye gods,
with mercy look on this declining rock
of valour, and of virtue; breed not up
(from infancy) in honour, to full man,
as you have done him, to destroy: here, strike;
for I have only searched thy wound: dispatch:
far, far be such love from Valerius,
foe far he scorns to live to be called brother
by him that dares own such folly and such vice.
'T is truth thou speak; but I do hate it: peace,
if heaven will snatch my sword out of my hand,
and put a rattle in it, what can I do?
He that is destined to be odious
in his old age, must undergo his fate.
If you do not back me, I shall never do 't.
I warrant you.
Humh, humh: Sir; my Lord, my Lord.
Ho? what 's the matter?
Humh; concerning the odd fifty, my Lord, and 't please your Generality, his Worship, Sir Nichodemus.
What 's here? a Pass? you would for Rome? you lubbers, doth one days laziness make ye covet home? away, ye boorish rogues; ye dogs, away.
Oh, oh, oh:
how now man, are you satisfied?
I, I, I: a—of your Corporal; I am paid soundly,
I was never better paid in all my life.
Marry the gods blessing on his honours heart: you have done a charitable deed, Sir, many more such may you live to do, Sir: the gods keep you, Sir, the gods protect you. 
These peasants mock me sure (Valerius)
forgive my dotage, see my ashes urned,
and tell fair Dorigen (she that but now
left me with this harsh vow, Sooner these rocks
should be removed, then she would yield) that I
was yet so loving, on her gift to die.
O Jupiter forbid it, Sir, and grant
this my device may certify thy mind:
you are my brother, nor must perish thus:
be comforted: think you fair Dorigen
would yield your wishes, if these envious rocks
by skill could be removed, or fallacy
she made believe so?
Why, she could not choose;
the Athenians are religious in their vows,
above all nations.
Soft, down yonder hill
the Lady comes this way, once more to try her,
if she persist in obstinacy: by my skill
learned from the old Caldean was my Tutor,
who trained me in the Mathematics, I will
so dazzle and delude her sight, that she
shall think this great impossibility
effected by some supernatural means.
Be confident, this engine shall at least,
till the gods better order, still this breast.
O my best brother, go; and for reward,
choose any part of the world, I'll give it thee.
O, little Rome, men say thou art a god;
thou might have got a fitter fool then I.
Art thou there, Basilic? remove thine eyes,
for I am sick to death with thy infection.
Yet, yet have mercy on me; save him, Lady,
whose single arm defends all Rome, whose mercy
hath saved thy husband's and thy life.
To spoil
our fame and honours? no, my vow is fixed,
and stands as constant as these stones do, still.
Then pity me, ye gods; you only may
move her, by tearing these firm stones away.
Martius rejoice, Jove sends me from above,
his Messenger, to cure thy desperate love;
to show rash vows cannot bind destiny:
Lady, behold, the rocks transplanted be.
Hard-hearted Dorigen, yield, lest for contempt,
They fix thee here a rock, whence they 're exempt.
What strange delusion 's this? what Sorcery
affrights me with these apparitions?
my colder Chastity 's nigh turned to death.
Hence, lewd Magician; dare thou make the gods
bawds to thy lust? will they do miracles
to further evil? or do they love it now?
know, if they dare do so, I dare hate them,
and will no longer serve 'em. Jupiter,
thy golden shower, nor thy snow-white Swan,
had I been Lada, or bright Dane,
had bought mine honour. Turn me into stone
for being good, and blush when thou hast done.
O my Valerius, all yet will not do;
unless I could so draw mine honesty
down to the lees to be a ravisher;
she calls me witch, and villain.
Patience, Sir,
the gods will punish perjury. Let her breathe
and ruminate on this strange sight. Time decays
the strongest fairest buildings we can find;
but still Diana fortify her mind. 
Weep not, bright Dorigen; for thou hast stood
constant and chaste (it seems against gods and men)
when rocks and mountains were removed. These wonders
do stupefy my senses. Martius,
this is inhumane: was thy sickness lust?
yet were this truth, why weeps she? Jealous soul,
what dost thou thus suggest? Vows, Magic, Rocks?
fine tales, and tears. She ne'er complained before.
I bade her visit him; she often did,
had many opportunities. Humh, it is nought: O,
no way but this. Come, weep no more, I have pondered
this miracle: the anger of the gods,
thy vow, my love to thee, and Martius:
he must not perish, nor thou be forsworn,
lest worse fates follow us, Go, keep thy oath:
for chaste, and whore, are words of equal length:
but let not Martius know that I consent.
O, I am pulled in pieces.
I? say you so?
I'll meet you in your path. O wretched men,
with all your valour and your learning, bubbles.
Forgive me, Sophocles. Yet why kneel I
for pardon, having been but over-diligent,
like an obedient servant, antedating
my Lords command? Sir, I have often and already given
this bosom up to his embraces, and
am proud that my dear Lord is pleased with it;
whose gentle honourable mind I see
participates even all, his wife and all,
unto his friend. You are sad, Sir. Martius loves me,
and I love Martius, with such ardency
as never married couple could: I must
attend him now. My Lord, when you have need
to use your own wife, pray Sir send for me;
till then, make use of your Philosophy. 
Stay, Dorigen: O me, inquisitive fool!
thou that did order this congested heap
when it was Chaos, twixt thy spacious palms
forming it to this vast rotundie;
dissolve it now; shuffle the elements,
that no one proper by it self may stand:
let the sea quench the sun, and in that instant
the sun drink up the sea: day, ne'er come down,
to light me to those deeds that must be done.
Hail, General of Rome; from Sophocles
that honours Martius, Dorigen presents
her self to be dishonoured: do thy will;
for Sophocles commands me to obey.
Come, violate all rules of holiness,
and rend the consecrated knot of love.
Never, Valerius, was I blessed till now:
behold the end of all my weary steps,
the prize of all my Battles: leave us, all;
leave us as quick as thought. Thus joy begin,
in zealous love a minutes loss is sin.
Can Martius be so vile? or Dorigen?
Stay, stay: and monster, keep thou further off;
I thought thy brave soul would have much, much loathed
to have gone on still on such terms as this.
See, thou ungrateful, since thy desperate lust
nothing can cure but death, I'll die for thee,
whilst my chaste name lives to posterity.
Live, live, thou Angel of thy sex: forgive,
till by those golden tresses thou be snatched
alive to heaven: for thy corruption 's
so little, that it cannot suffer death.
Was ever such a woman? O my Mirror,
how perfectly thou show me all my faults,
which now I hate! and when I next attempt thee,
let all the fires in the Zodiac
drop on this cursed head.
O blessed event!
Rise like the sun again in all his glory,
after a dark Eclipse.
Never without a pardon.
Sir, you have forgiven your self.
Behold their impudence: are my words just?
Unthankful man, viper to Arms, and Rome
thy natural mother: have I warmed thee here
to corrode even my heart? Martius, prepare
to kill me, or be killed.
Why, Sophocles,
then prithee kill me; I deserve it highly;
for I have both transgressed against men, and gods;
but am repentant now, and in best case
to uncase my soul of this oppressing flesh;
which, though (Gods witness) nev'r was actually
injurious to thy wife and thee, yet 't was
her goodness that restrained and held me now:
but take my life, dear friend, for my intent,
or else forgive it.
By the gods of Athens,
these words are true, and all direct again.
Pardon me, Dorigen.
Forgive me, Sophocles,
and Dorigen too, and every one that 's good.
Rise, noble Roman, beloved Sophocles,
take to thy breast thy friend.
And to thy heart
thy matchless wife: heaven has not stuff enough
to make another such: for if it could,
Martius would marry too. For thy blessed sake
(O thou infinity of excellence)
henceforth in men's discourse Rome shall not take
the wall of Athens, as 'tofore. But when
in their fair honours we to speak do come,
we'll say 'T was so in Athens, and in Rome.
Honour set op thy gates, and with thee bring
my servant and thy friend, fair Dorigen:
Let her triumph, with her, her Lord, and friend,
who, though misled, still honour was their end.
How like you it?
Rarely; so well, I would they would do it again. How many of our wives now adays would deserve to triumph in such a Chariot?
That's all one; you see they triumph in Caro∣ches.
That they do, by the mass; but not all neither; many of them are content with Carts. But Seignior, I have now found out a great absurdity in faith.
What was 't?
The Prologue presenting four Triumphs, made but three legs to the King: a three legged Prologue, 't was monstrous.
'T had been more monstrous to have had a four-legged one. Peace, the King speaks.
Here was a woman, Isabel.
I, my Lord,
but that she told a lye to vex her husband;
therein she failed.
She served him well enough;
he that was so much man, yet would be cast
to jealousy for her integrity.
This teaches us, the passion of love
can fight with Soldiers, and with Scholars too.
In Martius, clemency and valour shown,
in the other, courage and humanity;
and therefore in the Triumph they were ushered
by clemency and valour.
Rightly observed,
as she by chastity and constancy;
what hurt 's now in a Play, against which some rail
so vehemently? thou and I, my Love,
make excellent use methinks: I learn to be
a lawful lover void of jealousy,
and thou a constant wife. Sweet Poetry 's
a flower, where men, like Bees and Spiders, may
bear poison, or else sweets and Wax away.
Be venom-drawing Spiders they that will;
I'll be the Bee, and suck the honey still. 
Stay, clouds, ye rack too fast: bright Phoebus see,
Honour has triumphed with fair Chastity:
Give Love now leave, in purity to sh•w
Ʋnchaste affections fly not from his bow.
Produce the sweet example of your youth.
Whilst I provide a Triumph for your Truth.
Why does my Gerard grieve?
O my sweet Mistress,
't is not life (which by our Milain law
my fact hath forfeited) makes me thus pensive;
that I would lose to save the little finger
of this your noble burden, from least hurt,
because your blood is in it. But since your love
made poor incompatible me the parent,
(being we are not married) your dear blood
falls under the same cruel penalty;
and can heaven think fit ye die for me?
for heavens sake say I ravished you, I'll swear it,
to keep your life safc, and repute unstained.
O Gerard, the art my life and faculties;
and if I lose thee, I'll not keep mine own;
the thought of whom, sweetens all miseries.
Would have me murder thee beyond thy death?
unjustly scandal thee with ravishment?
It was so far from rape, that heaven doth know,
if ever the first Lovers, ere they fell,
knew simply in the state of innocence,
such was this act, this, that doth ask no blush.
O, but my rarest Violin, when
my Lord Randulpho brother to your father,
shall understand this, how will he exclaim,
that my poor Aunt, and me, which his free alms
hath nursed, since Millain by the Duke of Mantua
(who now usurps it) was surprised? that time
my father and my mother were both slain,
with my Aunts husband, as she says, their states
despoiled and seized; it is past my memory,
but thus she told me: only this I know,
since I could understand, your honoured Uncle
hath given me all the liberal education
that his own son might look for, had he one;
now will he say, Dost thou requite me thus?
O the thought kills me.
Gentle, gentle Gerard,
be cheered, and hope the best. My mother, father,
and uncle love me most indulgently,
being the only branch of all their stocks:
but neither they, nor he thou would not grieve
with this unwelcome news, shall ever hear
Violin 's tongue reveal, much less accuse
Gerard to be the father of his own;
I'll rather silent die, that thou moist live
to see thy little off-spring grow and thrive.
Mistress, away, your Lord and father seeks you;
I'll convey Gerard out at the back door;
he has found a husband for you, and insults
in his invention, little thinking you
have made your own choice, and possessed him too.
A husband? 't must be Gerard, or my death.
Fare well; be only true unto thy self,
and know heavens goodness shall prevented be,
ere worthiest Gerard suffer harm for me.
Fare well, my life and soul. Aunt, to your counsel
I flee for aid. O unexpressible love! thou art
an undigested heap of mixed extremes,
whose pangs are wakings, and whose pleasures dreams.
My Angelina, never did thou yet
so please me, as in this consent; and yet
thou hast pleased me well, I swear, old wench: ha, ah.
Ferdinand, she's thine own; thou'st have her, boy,
ask thy good Lady else.
Whom shall I have, Sir?
Whom d' ye think, in faith?
Guess.
Noble Madam,
I may hope (prompted by shallow merit)
through your profound grace, for your chamber-maid.
How 's that? how 's that?
Her chamber-maid, my Lord.
Her chambe-pot, my Lord. You modest ass,
thou never should thy self an ass till now.
Before heaven I am angry with thee. Sirha, sirha,
this whitmeat-spirit 's not yours, legitimate,
advance your hope, and 't please you: guess again.
And let your thoughts flee higher: aim them right;
Sir, you may hit, you have the fairest white.
If I may be so bold then, my good Lord.
your favour doth encourage me to aspire
to catch my Ladies Gentlewoman.
Where?
where would you catch her?
do you know my daughter Violanta, Sir?
Well said: no more about the bush.
My good Lord,
I have gazed on Violanta, and the stars,
whose heavenly influence I admired, not knew,
nor ever was so sinful to believe
I might attain 't.
Now you are an ass again;
for if thou ne'er attain'st, 't is only long
of that faint heart of thine, which never did it.
She is your Lords heir, mine, Benvoglio 's heir,
my brothers too, Randulpho 's; her descent
not behind any of the Millanois.
And Ferdinand, although thy parentage
be unknown, thou know that I have bred thee up
from five years old, and (do not blush to hear it)
have found thy wisdom, trust, and fair success
so full in all my affairs, that I am fitter
to call thee Master, then thou me thy Lord.
Thou can not be but sprung of gentlest blood;
thy mind shines thorough thee, like the radiant sun,
although thy body be a beauteous cloud.
Come, seriously this is no flattery,
and well thou know it, though thy modest blood
rise like the morning in thy check to hear 't.
Sir, I can speak in earnest: Virtuous service,
so meritorious, Ferdinand, as yours,
(yet bashful still, and silent?) should extract
a fuller price then impudence exact:
and this is now the wages it must have;
my daughter is thy wife, my wealth thy slave.
Good Madam pinch; I sleep: does my Lord mock,
and you assist? Custom 's inverted quite;
for old men now adays do flout the young.
Fetch Violanta. As I intend this
religiously, let my soul find joy or pain.
My honoured Lord and Master, if I hold
that worth could merit such felicity,
you bred it in me, and first purchased it;
it is your own: and what productions
in all my faculties my soul begets,
your very mark is on: you need not add
rewards to him that is in debt to you:
you saved my life, Sir, in the Massacre;
there you begot me new, since fostered me.
O, can I serve too much, or pray for you?
alas, it is slender payment to your bounty.
Your daughter is a paradise, and I
unworthy to be set there; you may choose
the royalst seeds of Milain.
Prithee peace,
thy goodness makes me weep; I am resolved:
I am no Lord of the time, to tie my blood
to sordid muck; I have enough: my name,
my state and honours I will store in thee,
whose wisdom will rule well, keep and increase:
a knave or fool that could confer the like,
would bate each hour, diminish every day.
Thou art her price-lot then, drawn out by fate;
an honest wise man is a Princes mate.
Sir, heaven and you have over-charg'd my breast
with grace beyond my continence; I shall burst:
the blessing you have given me (witness Saints)
I would not change for Millain. But, my Lord,
is she prepared?
What needs Preparative,
where such a Cordial is prescribed as thou?
thy person and thy virtues in one scale,
shall poise hers, with her beauty and her wealth;
if not, I add my will unto thy weight;
thy mother 's with her now. Son, take my keys,
and let this preparation for this Marriage,
(this welcome Marriage) long determined here,
be quick, and gorgeous. —Gerard.
My good Lord,
my Lord your brother craves your conference
instantly, on affairs of high import.
Why, what news?
The Tyrant, my good Lord,
is sick to death of his old Apoplexy,
whereon the States advise that Letters missive
be straight dispatcht to all the neighbour-Countreys,
and Schedules too divulged on every post,
to enquire the lost Duke forth: their purpose is
to reinstate him.
It is a pious deed.
Ferdinand, to my daughter: this delay
(though to so good a purpose) angers me;
but I'll recover it. Be secret, son.
Go woo with truth and expedition. 
O my uncounted joy! how fares my Gerard,
my noble twin-friend? fie, thy look is heavy,
sullen, and sour; blanch it: did thou know
my cause of joy, thou would never sorrow more,
I know thou love me so. How dost thou?
Well,
too well: my fraught of health my sickness is;
in life, I am dead; by living dying still.
What sublunary mischief can predominate
a wise man thus? or doth thy friendship play
(in this antipathous extreme) with mine,
lest gladness suffocate me? I, I, I do feel
my spirit's turned to fire, my blood to air,
and I am like a purified essence
tried from all drossy parts.
Were 't but my life,
the loss were sacrificed; but virtue
must for me slain, and innocence made dust.
Fare well, good Gerard.
Dearest friend, stay.
Sad thoughts are no companions for me now,
much less sad words: thy bosom binds some secret,
which do not trust me with; for mine retains
another, which I must conceal from thee.
I would reveal it: 't is a heavy tale:
can thou be true and secret still?
Why, friend,
if you continue true unto your self,
I have no means of falsehood. Lock this door:
come, yet your prisoner 's sure.
Stay, Ferdinand.
What is this trouble? Love?
why thou art capable of any woman.
Doth want oppress thee? I will lighten thee:
hast thou offended law? my Lord and thine,
and I, will save thy life. Does servitude
upbraid thy freedom, that she suffers it?
have patience but three days, and I will make thee
thy Lords companion. Can a friend do more?
Lend me the means. How can this be?
First, let this Cabinet keep your pawn, and I will trust:
yet for the form of satisfaction,
take this my Oath to boot. By my presumed
Gentry, and sacred known Christianity,
I'll die ere I reveal thy trust.
Then hear it.
Your Lords fair daughter Violanta is
my betrothed wife, goes great with child by me;
and by this deed both made a prey to Law.
How may I save her life? advise me, friend.
What did he say? Gerard, whose voice was that?
O death unto my heart, bane to my soul!
my wealth is vanished like the rich mans store:
in one poor minute all my dainty fare
but juggling dishes; my fat hope, despair.
Is this so odious? where 's your mirth?
Why thou
hast robbed me of it. Gerard, draw thy sword;
and if thou love my Mistress chastity,
defend it, else I'll cut it from thy heart,
thy thievish heart that stale it, and restore 't:
do miracles to gain her.
Was she thine?
Never, but in my wish, and her fathers vow,
which now he left with me, on such sure terms;
he called me son, and willed me to provide
my Wedding-preparation.
Strange.
Come, let's
kill one another quickly.
Ferdinand, my love is old to her, thine new begot:
I have not wronged thee; think upon thine Oath.
It manacles me, Gerard, else this hand
should bear thee to the Law. Fare well for ever:
since friendship is so fatal, never more
will I have friend: thou hast put so sure a plea,
that all my weal 's litigious made by thee.
I did no crime to you. His love transports him;
and yet I mourn, that cruel destiny
should make us two thus one another cross:
we have loved since, boys; for the same time cast him
on Lord Benvoglio, that my Aunt and I
were succoured by Randulpho: men have called us
the parallels of Millain; and some said
we were not much unlike. O heaven divert
that we should (ever since that time) be breeding
mutual destruction. 
O where are you? you have made a fair hand. By —yonder is your Aunt with my Lady; she came in just as she was wooing your Mistress for another; and what did me she, but out with her purse, and showed all the na∣ked truth, in faith. Fie upon you, you should never trust an old woman with a secret; they cannot hold; they can∣not hold so well as we, and you'd hang 'em. First, there was swearing and staring, then there was howling and weeping, and O my daughter, and O my mother.
The effect, the effect.
Marry no way but one with you.
Why welcome. Shall she scope?
Nay, she has made her scope already.
Why, is she gone?
The scope of her virginity, I mean.
You men are as dull, you can conceive nothing;
you think it is enough to beget.
I; but surely, Dorothea, that escaped not;
her maidenhead suffered.
And you were the Executioner.
But what 's the event? lord, how thou starv'st me, Doll?
Lord how thou starv'st me, Doll? By—I would fain see you cry a little. Do you stand now as if you could get a child? Come, I'll rack you no more: This is the heart of the business: always provided, Seignior, that if it please the Fates to make you a Lord, you be not proud, nor forget your poor handmaid Doll, who was partly accessory to the incision of this Holofernian maiden∣head.
I will forget my name first. Speak.
Then thus: My Lady knows all; her sorrow is reasonably well digested; has vowed to conceal it from my Lord, till delay ripen things better; wills you to attend her this evening at the back gate; I'll let you in; where her own Confessor shall put you together lawfully ere the child be born; which birth is very near, I can assure you: all your charge is your vigilance; and to bring with you some trusty Nurse to convey the infant out of the house.
O beam of comfort, take! go, tell my Lady
I pray for her as I walk: my joys so flow,
that what I speak, or do, I do not know. 
He 's dead, you say then.
Certainly: and to hear
the people now dissect him now he's gone,
makes my ears burn, that loved him not: such Libels,
such Elegies and Epigrams they have made,
more odious then he was. Brother, great men
had need to live by love, meting their deeds
with virtues rule; sound, with the weight of judgement,
their privat'st action: for though while they live
their power and policy mask their villainies,
their bribes, their lust, pride, and ambition,
and make a many slaves to worship 'em,
that are their flatterers, and their bawds in these:
these very slaves shall when these great beasts die,
publish their bowels to the vulgar eye.
Fore heaven, 't is true. But is Rinaldo (brother)
our good Duke, heard of living?
Living, Sir, and will be shortly with the Senate: has
been close concealed at Mantua, and relieved:
but what 's become of his? no tidings yet?
But brother, till our good Duke shall arrive,
carry this news, here. Where 's your Ferdinand?
O busy, Sir, abut this Marriage:
and yet my girl of the sudden is fallen sick:
you'll see her ere you go?
Yes; well I love her;
and yet I wish I had another daughter
to gratify my Gerard, who (by —)
is all the glory of my family,
but has too much worth to live so obscure;
I'll have him Secretrry of Estate
upon the Dukes return: for credit me,
the value of that Gentleman 's not known;
his strong abilities are fit to guide
the whole Republike: he hath learning, youth,
valour, discretion, honesty of a Saint;
his aunt is wondrous good too.
You have spoke
the very character of Ferdinand:
one is the others mirror. How now, daughter?
How fares my Niece?
A little better, Uncle, then I was,
I thank you.
Brother, a mere cold.
It was a cold and heat, I think: but heaven be thanked
we have broken that away.
And yet, Violanta,
you'll lie above still, and you see what 's got.
Sure, Sir, when this was got, she had a bed-fellow.
What, has her Colic left her in her belly?
'T has left her, but she has had a sore fit.
I, that same Colic and Stone 's inherent to us
of the women's side: our mothers had them both.
So has she had, Sir. How these old fornicators talk? she had more
need of Mace-ale, and Renish-wine Candles, heaven knows,
then your aged discipline.
Say?
She will have the man; and on recovery
will wholly be disposed by you.
That 's my wench:
how now? what change is this? why Ferdinand,
are these your robes of joy should be endued?
doth Hymen wear black? I did send for you
to have my honourable brother witness
the Contract I will make twixt you and her.
Put off all doubt; she loves ye? what d' ye say?
Speak, man. Why look you so distractedly?
There are your keys, Sir: I'll no Contracts, I.
Divinest Violanta, I will serve you
thus on my knees, and pray for you: Juno Lucina fer opem:
my inequality ascends no higher:
I dare not marry you.
How 's this?
Good night.
I have a friend has almost made me mad:
I weep sometimes, and instantly can laugh:
nay, I do dance, and sing, and suddenly
roar like a storm. Strange tricks these, are they not?
and wherefore all this? shall I tell you? no,
thorough mine ears, my heart a plague hath caught,
and I have vowed to keep it close, not show
my grief to any; for it has no cure.
On, wandering steps, to some remote place move:
I'll keep my vow, though I have lost my Love.
Before heaven, distracted for her! fare you well:
I'll watch his steps; for I no joy shall find,
till I have found his cause, and calmed his mind.
He 's overcome with joy.
'T is very strange.
Well, sister, I must leave you; the time 's busy.
Violanta, cheer you up: and I pray heaven
restore each to their love, and he•lth again. 
Amen, great Uncle. Mother, what a chance
unluckily is added to my wo,
in this young Gentleman?
True, Violanta:
it grieves me much. Doll, go you instantly,
and find out Gerard; tell him his friends hap,
and let him use best means to comfort him;
but as his life preserve this secret still.
Mother, I 'ld not offend you: might not Gerard
steal in, and see me in the evening?
Well,
bid him do so.
Heavens blessing of your heart.
Do ye not call Childbearing Travel, mother?
Yes.
It well may be. The bare-foot traveller
that 's born a Prince, and walks his pilgrimage,
whose tender feet kiss the remorseless stones
only, ne'er felt a travel like to it.
Alas, dear mother, you groaned thus for me,
and yet how disobedient have I been?
Peace, Violanta, thou hast always been
gentle and good.
Gerard is better, mother:
O if you knew the implicit innocence
dwells in his breast, you 'ld love him like your prayers.
I see no reason but my father might
be told the truth, being pleased for Ferdinand
to woo himself: and Gerard ever was
his full comparative: my Uncle loves him,
as he loves Ferdinand.
No, not for the world,
since his intent is crossed: loved Ferdinand
thus ruined, and a child got out of Wedlock!
his madness would pursue ye both to death.
As you please (mother): I am now, methinks,
even in the land of ease; I'll sleep.
Draw in
the bed nearer the fire: silken rest,
tie all thy cares up.
O blessed solitude! here my griefs may speak;
and Sorrow, I will argue with thee now:
Nothing will keep me company: the flowers
die at my moan; the gliding silver streams
hasten to flee my lamentations;
the air rolls from 'em; and the golden sun
is smothered pale as Phoebe with my sighs:
only the earth is kind, that stays. Then earth,
to thee will I complain. Why do the heavens
impose upon me love, what I can ne'er enjoy?
before fruition was impossible,
I did not thirst it. Gerard, she is thine,
sealed and delivered; but 't was ill to stain
her virgin state ere ye were married.
Poor infant, what 's become of thee? thou know not
the wo thy parents brought thee to. Dear earth,
bury this close in thy sterility;
be barren to this seed, let it not grow;
for if it do, 't will bud no Violet
nor Gilly-flower, but wilde Brier, or rank Rue,
unsavoury and hurtful.
Ferdinand,
thy steel hath dug the earth, thy words my heart.
O, I have violated faith, betrayed,
my friend and innocence.
Desperate youth,
violate not thy soul too: I have showers
for thee, young man; but Gerard flames for thee.
Was thy base pen made to dash out mine honour,
and prostitute my daughter? Bastard, whore,
come, turn thy female tears into revenge,
which I will quench my thirst with, ere I see
daughter, or wife, or branded family.
By—both die: and for amends,
Ferdnando be my heir. I'll to my brother,
first tell him all; then to the Duke for justice:
this morning he's received. Mountains nor seas
shall bar my flight to vengeance: the foul stain
printed on me, thy blood shall rinse again. 
I have transgressed all goodness, witlessly
raised mine own curses from posterity:
I'll follow, to redress in what I may;
if not, your heir can die as well as they.
Gerard not come? nor Dorothy returned?
what averse star ruled my Nativity?
the time to night hath been as dilatory
as languishing Consumptions. But till now
I never durst say my Gerard was unkind.
Heaven grant all things go well; and nothing does,
if he be ill, which I much fear: my dreams
have been portentous. I did think I saw
my Love araid for battle with a beast,
a hideous monster, armed with teeth and claws,
grinning, and venomous, that sought to make
both us a prey: on 's tail was lashed in blood
Law: and his forehead I did plainly see
held Characters that spelled Authority.
This rent my slumbers; and my fearful soul
ran searching up and down my dismayed breast,
to find a port to escape. Good faith, I am cold;
but Gerrad's love is colder: here I'll sit,
and think my self away.
The peace of love
attend the sweet Violanta: Read,
for the sad news I bring I do not know;
only I am sworn to give you that, and this.
Is it from Gerard? gentle Ferdinand,
how glad am I to see you thus well restored?
in troth he never wronged you in his life,
nor I, but always held fair thoughts of you,
knew not my Fathers meaning, till of late;
could never have known it soon enough: For Sir,
Gerrard's and my affection began
in infancy: My Uncle brought him oft
in long coats hither; you were such another;
the little boy would kiss me being a child,
and say, he loved me; give me all his toys,
bracelets, rings, sweet-meats, all his rosie smiles:
I then would stand and stare upon his eyes,
play with his locks, and swear I loved him too;
For sure, me thought, he was a little Love,
he wooed so prettily in innocence,
that then he warmed my fancy; for I felt
a glimmering beam of love kindle my blood,
both which time since hath made a flame and flood.
O gentle innocent! me thinks it talks
like a child still, whose white simplicity
never arrived at sin. Forgive me, Lady,
I have destroyed Gerard, and thee; rebelled
against heavens ordinance; dis-pair'd two doves,
made 'em sit mourning; slaughtered love, and cleft
the heart of all integrity. This breast
was trusted with the secret of your vow
by Gerard, and revealed it to your father.
Ho.
Read, and curse me.
Neither: I will never
nor write, nor read again.
My penance be it.
Reads, Your labyrinth is found, your lust proclaimed
Lust? humh:
my mother sure felt none when I was got.
I, and the law implacably offended.
Gerrard's imprisoned, and to die.
O heaven!
and you to suffer with reproach and scoffs,
a public execution; I have sent you
an Antidote against shame, poison; by him
you have most wronged: give him your penitent tears.
Humh: it is not truth.
Drink, and farewell for ever:
And though thy whoredom blemish thy whole line,
Prevent the Hangmans stroke, and die like mine.
Oh wo is me for Gerard: I have brought
confusion on the noblest Gentleman
that ever truly loved. But we shall meet
where our condemners shall not, and enjoy
a more refined affection then here;
no law, nor father hinders marriage there
twixt souls divinely affi'd, as (sure) ours were:
there we will multiply, and generate joys
like fruitful parents. Luckless Ferdinand,
Whore's the good old Gentlewoman, my husbands Aunt?
Thrust from you Uncle to all poverty.
Alas the pity: Reach me, Sir, the cup;
I'll say my prayers, and take my fathers physic.
O villain that I was, I had forgot
to spill the rest, and am unable now
to stir to hinder her.
What ail you, Sir?
Your father is a monster, I a villain,
this tongue has killed you: pardon, Violanta,
oh pardon, Gerard; and for sacrifice,
accept my life, to expiate my fault.
I have drunk up the poison.
Thou art not so
uncharitable: a better fellow far,
thou'st left me half. Sure death is now atria,
and calls for more blood still to quench his thirst.
I pledge thee Ferdinand, to Gerrards health:
Deer Gerard, poor Aunt, and unfortunate friend,
Ay me, that love should breed true Lovers end.
Stay Madam, stay; help hoe, for heavens sake help;
Improvident man, that good I did intend
for satisfaction, saving of her life,
my equal cruel stars made me forget.
What spectacle of death assaults me? oh.
My dearest mother, I am dead, I leave
father, and friends, and life, to follow love.
Good mother, love my child, that did no ill.
Fie, how men lie, that say, death is a pain:
or has he changed his nature? like soft sleep
he seizes me. Your blessing. Last, I crave,
that I may rest by Gerard in his grave.
There lay me too: O noble Mistress, I
have cause all this; and thesefore justly die.
That key will open all.
O viperous father!
For heavens sake bear 'em in: run for Physicians,
and medicines quickly: Heaven, thou shalt not have her
yet; it is too soon: Alas, I have no more,
and taking her away, thou rob the poor. 
The Law, as greedy as your red desire
Benvoglio, hath cast this man: It is pity
so many excellent parts are swallo'wd up
in one foul wave. Is Violanta sent for?
Our Justice must not lop a branch, and let
the body grow still.
Sir, she will be here
alive or dead, I am sure.
How cheerfully my countenance comments death?
that which makes men seem horrid, I will wear
like to an ornament. O Violanta,
might my life only satisfy the Law,
how jocundly my soul would enter heaven?
Why? should thou die, thou wither'st in thy bud,
as I have seen a Rose, ere it was blown.
I doe beseech your Grace, the Statute may
(in this case made) be read: not that I hope
to extenuate my offence or penalty,
but to see whether it lay hold on her.
And since my death is more exemplary
then just, this public reading will advise
caution to others.
Read it.
Brother, does not
your soul groan under this severity?
A Statute provided in case of unequal Matches, Marriages against parents con∣sent, stealing of heirs, Rapes, Prostitu∣tions, and such like: That if any person meanly descended, or ignorant of his own Parentage, which implies as much, shall with a foul intent unlawfully sol∣licit the daughter of any Peer of the Dukedom, he shall for the same offence forfeit his right hand: but if he further prostitute her to his lust, he shall first have his right hand cut off, and then suf∣fer death by the common Executioner. After whom, the Lady so offending shall likewise the next day in the same man∣ner, die for the fact.
This Statute has more cruelty then sense:
I see no ray of mercy. Must the Lady
suffer death too? suppose she were enforced,
by some confederates born away, and ravished;
is she not guiltless?
Yes, if it be proved.
This case is so: I ravished Violanta.
Who ever knew a rape produce a child?
Pish, these are idle. Will your grace command the Executioner proceed?
Your Office.
Fare well to thy enticing vanity,
thou round gilt Box, that dost deceive mans eye:
the wise man knows, when open thou art broke,
the treasure thou includ'st is dust and smoke,
even thus I cast thee by. My Lords, the Law
is but the great mans mule; he rides on it,
and tramples poorer men under his feet;
yet when they come to knock at yond' bright gate,
ones rags shall enter, before the others state.
Peace to ye all: here, sirha, strike; this hand
hath Violanta kissed a thousand times;
it smells sweet ever since: this was the hand
plighted my faith to her: do not think thou can
cut that in sunder with my hand. My Lord,
as free from speck as this arm is, my heart
is of foul lust; and every vein glides here
as full of truth. Why does thy hand shake so?
't is mine must be cut off, and that is firm;
for it was ever constant.
Hold; your Sentence
unjustly is pronounced, my Lord: this blow
cuts your hand off; for his is none of yours:
but Violanta 's given in holy Marriage
before she was delivered, consummated
with the free will of her mother, by her Confessor,
in Lord Benvoglio 's house.
Alas, good Aunt,
that helps us nothing; else I had revealed it.
What woman 's this?
A base confederate
in this proceeding, kept of alms long time
by him; who now exposed to misery,
talks thus distractedly. Attach her, Guard.
Your cruelty (brother) will have end.
You 'd best
let them attach my tongue.
Good woman, peace:
for were this truth, it doth not help thy nephew;
the Law 's infringed by their disparity,
that forfeits both their lives.
Sir, with your pardon,
had your Grace ever children?
Thou hast put
a question whose sharp point touches my heart:
I had two little sons, twins, who were both
(with my good Duchess) slain, as I did hear,
at that time when my Dukedom was surprised.
I have heard many say (my gracious Lord)
that I was wondrous like her.
Ha?
By all mans joy, it is Cornelia,
my dearest wife.
To ratify me her,
come down, Alphonso, one of those two twins,
and take thy fathers blessing: thou hast broke
no Law, thy birth being above thy wives:
Ascanio is the other, named Fernando,
who by remote means, to my Lord Benvoglio
I got preferred; and in poor habits clad,
(you fled, and the innovation laid again)
I wrought my self into Randulpho's service,
with my eldest boy; yet never durst reveal
what they and I were, no, not to themselves,
until the Tyrants death.
My joy has filled me
like a full-winded sail: I cannot speak.
Fetch Violanta, and my brother.
Run,
run like a spout, you rogue: a—of poison,
that little whore I trusted, will betray me.
Stay, hang-man, I have work for you; there 's gold;
cut off my head, or hang me presently.
This is your rashness, brother.
O joy, thou were too great to last;
this was a cruel turning to our hopes,
unnatural father: poor Ascanio.
O mother, let me be Gerard again,
and follow Violanta.
O my son—
Your lives yet, bloody men, shall answer this,
I must not see 'em longer grieve. My Lord,
be comforted; let sadness generally
forsake each eye and bosom; they both live:
for poison, I infused mere Opium;
holding compulsive perjury less sin
then such a loathed murder would have bin.
oh blessed Maiden.
Music, gently creep
into their ears, and fright hence lazy sleep.
Morpheus, command thy servant Sleep
in leaden chains no longer keep
this Prince and Lady: Rise, wake, rise,
and round about convey your eyes:
Rise Prince, go greet thy Father and thy Mother;
Rise thou to embrace thy Husband and thy Brother.
Son, Daughter.
Father, Mother, Brother.
Wife,
Are we not all in heaven?
Faith, very near it.
How can this be?
Hear it.
If I had ser'vd you right, I should have seen
your old pate off, ere I had revealed.
O wench,
oh honest wench; if my wife die, I'll marry thee:
There's my reward.
It is true.
It is very strange.
Why kneel you, honest Master?
My good Lord.
Deer Mother.
Rise, rise, all are friends: I owe ye
for all their boards: And wench, take thou the man
whose life thou sav'dst; less cannot pay thy merit.
How shall I part my kiss? I cannot: Let
one generally therefore join our cheeks.
A pen of iron, and a leaf of brass,
to keep this Story to eternity:
and a Promethean wit. O sacred Love,
nor chance, nor death can thy firm truth remove.
Now Isabella. 
This can true love doe.
I joy they all so happily are pleased:
the Ladies and the brothers must triumph.
They doe:
for Cupped scorns but to have his triumph too.
Love, and the strength of fair affection
(Most royal Sir) what long seemed lost have won
Their perfect ends, and crowned those constant hearts
With lasting Triumph, whose most virtuous parts,
Worthy desires, and love, shall never end.
Now turn we round the Scene, and (Great Sir) lend
A sad and serious eye to this of Death,
This black and dismal Triumph; where mans breath,
Desert, and guilty blood ascend the Stage,
And view the Tyrant ruined in his rage. 
No, good my Lord, I am not now to find
your long neglect of me; All those affections
you came first clad in to my love, like Summer,
lusty and full of life: all those desires
that like the painted Spring bloomed round about ye,
giving the happy promise of an harvest,
how have I seen drop off, and fall forgotten?
With the least lustre of another beauty,
how oft (forgetful Lord) have I been blasted?
Was I so eas'ly won? or did this body
yield to your false embraces with less labour
then if you had carried some strong town?
Good Gabriel.
Could all your subtilties and sighs betray me,
the vows ye shook me with, the tears ye drowned me,
till I came fairly off with honoured marriage?
O fie, my Lord.
Prithee, good Gabriella.
Would I had never known ye, nor your honours,
they are stuck too full of griefs: oh happy women,
that plant your love in equal honest bosoms,
whose sweet desires, like roses set together,
make one another happy in their blushes,
growing and dying without sense of greatness,
to which I am a slave! and that blessed Sacrament
that daily makes millions of happy mothers,
linked me to this mans lust alone, there left me.
I dare not say I am his wife, it is dangerous:
his Love, I cannot say: alas, how many?
You grow too warm; pray ye be content, you best know
the times necessity, and how our marriage
being so much unequal to mine honour,
while the Duke lives, I standing high in favour;
and whilst I keep that safe, next to the Dukedom,
must not be known, without my utter ruin.
Have patience for a while, and doe but dream wench,
the glory of a Duchess. How she tires me?
how dull and leaden is my appetite
to that stale beauty now? O, I could curse
and crucify my self for childish doting
upon a face that feeds not with fresh figures
every fresh hour: she is now a surfeit to me.
Who's that? Gentile? I charge ye, no acquaintance
you nor your maid with him, nor no discourse
till times are riper.
Fie, my noble Lord,
can you be now a stranger to the Court,
when your most virtuous Bride, the beauteous Helena
stands ready like a star to gild your happiness,
when Hymen's lusty fires are now a lighting,
and all the flower of Enjoy?
Some few trifles,
for matter of adornment, have a little
made me so slow, Gentile, which now in readiness,
I am for Court immediately.
Take heed, Sir,
this is no time for trifling, nor she no Lady
to be now entertained with toys: twill cost ye—
Y' are an old Cock, Gentile.
By your Lordships favour.
Prithee away; twill lose time.
O my Lord,
pardon me that by all means.
We have business
afoot man of more moment.
Then my manners?
I know none, nor I seek none.
Take to morrow.
Even now, by your Lordships leave. Excellent Beauty,
my ever service here I dedicate,
in honour of my best friend, your dead Father,
to you his living virtue, and wish heartily,
that firm affection that made us two happy,
may take as deep undying root, and flourish
betwixt my daughter Casta, and your goodness,
who shall be still your servant.
I much thank ye.
—of this dreaming puppy. Will ye go, Sir?
A little more, Good Lord.
Not now, by —
Come, I must use ye.
Goodness dwell still with you. 
The sight of this old Gentleman, Maria,
pulls to mine eyes again the living picture
of Perolot his virtuous son, my first Love,
that died at Orleans.
You have felt both fortunes,
and in extremes, poor Lady: for young Perolot,
being every way unable to maintain you,
durst not make known his love to friend or father:
My Lord Level, being powerful, and you poor,
will not acknowledge you.
No more: Lets in wench:
there let my Lute speak my laments; they have tired me.
I grant, the Duke is wondrous provident
in his now planting for succession,
I know his care as honourable in the choice too,
Marines fair virtuous daughter: but what's all this?
to what end excellent arrives this travel,
when he that bears the main roof is so rotten?
You have hit it now indeed: For if fame lye not,
he is intemperate.
You express him poorly,
too gentle Sir: the most deboist and barbarous;
believe it, the most void of all humanity,
howere his cunning cloak it to his Uncle,
and those his pride depends upon.
I have herad too,
given excessively to drink.
Most certain,
and in that drink most dangerous: I speak these things
to one I know loves truth, and dares not wrong her.
You may speak on.
Uncertain as the sea, Sir,
proud and deceitful as his sins great Master;
his appetite to women, for there he carries
his main sail spread so boundless and abominably,
that but to have her name by that tongue spoken,
poisons the virtue of the purest Virgin.
I am sorry for young Gabriella then,
a maid reputed ever of fair carriage,
for he has been noted visiting.
She is gone then,
or any else, that promises or power,
gifts, or his guilfull vows can work upon;
but these are but poor parcels.
It is great pity.
Nor want these sins a chief saint to befriend 'em,
the Devil follows him; and for a truth Sir,
appears in visible figure often to him,
at which time he 's possessed with sudden trances,
cold deadly sweats, and griping of the conscience,
tormented strangely as they say.
Heaven turn him:
This marriage day moist thou well curse, fair Helen.
But let's go view the Ceremony.
I'll walk with you. 
I hear 'em come.
Would I might never hear more.
I told you still: but you were so incredulous.
See, there they kiss.
Adders be your embarces.
The poison of a rotten heart, O Helen,
blast thee as I have been; just such a flattery,
with that same cunning face, that smile upon 't,
O mark it Marie, mark it seriously,
that master smile caught me.
There's the old Duke, and
Marine her father.
Oh.
There Longavile—
the Ladies now.
Oh, I am murderd, Marie.
Beast, most inconstant beast.
There.
There I am not;
no more I am not there: Hear me oh heaven,
and all you powers of justice bow down to me;
but you of pity die. I am abused,
she that depended on your Providence,
she is abused: your honour is abused,
that noble piece ye made, and called it man,
is turned to devil: all the world 's abused:
Give me a women's will provoked to mischief,
a two edged heart; my suffering thoughts to wild-fires,
and my embraces to a timeless grave turn.
Here I'll step in, for it is an act of merit.
I am too big to utter more.
Take time then.
This solitary life at home undoes thee,
obscures thy beauty first, which should prefer thee;
next fills thee full of sad thoughts, which thy years
must not arrive at yet, they choke thy sweetness:
Follow the time, my girl, and it will bring thee
even to the fellowship of the noblest women,
Helen her self, to whom I would prefer thee,
and under whom this poor and private carriage
which I am only able yet to reach at,
being cast off, and all thy sweets at lustre,
will take thee as a fair friend, and prefer thee.
Good Sir, be not so cruel as to seek
to kill that sweet content y' have bred me to:
Have I not here enough to thank heaven for?
the free air uncorrupted with new flattery,
the water that I touch unbrib'd with odours
to make me sweet to others: the pure fire
not smothered up, and choked with lustful incense
to make my blood sweat; but burning clear and high,
tells me my mind must flame up so to heaven.
What should I do at Court, wear rich apparel?
me thinks these are as warm: And for your state, Sir,
wealthy enough; Is it you would have me proud,
and like a pageant, stuck up for amazements?
Teach not your child to tread that path, for fear (Sir)
your dry bones after death, groan in your grave
the miseries that follow.
Excellent Casta.
When shall I pray again (a Courtier)?
or when I doe, to what God? what new body
and new face must I make me, with new manners?
for I must be no more my self. Whose Mistress
must I be first? with whose sin-offring seasoned?
and when I am grown so great and glorious
with prostitution of my burning beauties,
that great Lords kneel, and Princes beg for favours,
do you think I'll be your daughter, a poor Gentleman's,
or know you for my Father?
My best Casta, 
O my most virtuous child, heaven reigns within thee;
take thine own choice, sweet child, and live a saint still.
The Lord Level; stand by, wench.
Gabriella,
she cannot, nor she dares not make it known,
my greatness crushes her, when-ere she offers:
why should I fear her then?
Come, let's pass on wench.
Gentile, come hither: Who's that Gentlewoman?
A child of mine, Sir, who observing custom,
is going to the Monastery to her prayers.
A fair one, a most sweet one; fitter far
to beautify a Court, then make a Votarist.
Go on, fair Beauty, and in your Orisons
remember me: Will ye, fair sweet?
Most humbly. 
An admirable Beauty: how it fires me!
But shoe's too full of grace, and I too wicked.
I feel my wonted fit: Defend me, goodness.
O, it grows colder still, and stiffer on me,
my hair stands up, my sinews shake and shrink:
Help me good heaven, and good thoughts dwell within me.
O get thee gone, thou evil evil spirit;
haunt me no more, I charge thee.
Yes Level:
thou art my vassal, and the slave to mischief,
I blast thee with new sin: pursue thy pleasure;
Casta is rare and sweet, a blowing Beauty;
set thy desires afire, and never quench 'em
till thou enjoy'st her; make her all thy heaven,
and all thy joy, for she is all true happiness:
Thou art powerful, use command; if that prevail not,
force her; I'll be thy friend.
O help me, help me.
Her virtue, like a spell, sink me to darkness. 
He's here still. How is 't, noble Lord? me thinks, Sir,
you look a little wildly. Is it that way?
is it her you stare on so? I have spied your fire, Sir,
but dare not stay the flaming. Come.
Sweet creature,
excellent Beauty, do me but the happiness
to be your humblest servant. O fair eyes,
O blessed, blessed sweetness, divine virgin.
O good my Lord, retire into your honour:
you 're spoken good and virtuous, placed at helm
to govern others from mischances: from example
of such fair Chronicles as great ones are,
we do, or sure we should direct our lives.
I know y' are full of worth, a school of virtue
daily instructing us that live below ye,
I make no doubt, dwells there.
I cannot answer,
she has struck me dumb with wonder.
Goodness guide ye. 
She's gone, and with her all light, and has left me
dark as my black desires. O devil lust,
how dost thou hug my blood, and whisper to me,
there is no day again, no time, no living,
without this lusty Beauty break upon me?
Let me collect my self, I strive like billows,
beaten against a rock, and fall a fool still.
I must enjoy her, and I will: from this hour
my thoughts and all my business shall be nothing,
my eating, and my sleeping, but her beauty,
and how to work it.
Health to my Lord Level.
Nay good Sir, do not turn with such displeasure;
I come not to afflict your new born pleasures;
my honoured Mistress, neither let that vex ye,
for nothing is intended but safe to you.
What of your Mistress? I am full of business.
I will be short, my Lord; she, loving Lady,
considring the unequal tie between ye,
and how your ruin with the Duke lay on it,
as also the most noble match now made,
by me sends back all links of marriage,
all holy vows, and rights of Ceremony,
all promises, oaths, tears, and all such pawns
you left in hostage: only her love she cannot,
for that still follows ye, but not to hurt ye;
and still beholds ye Sir, but not to shame ye:
In recompense of which, this is her suit, Sir,
her poor and last petition, but to grant her,
when weary nights have cloyed ye up with kisses,
(as such must come) the honour of a Mistress,
the honour but to let her see those eyes,
(those eyes she dotes on more then gods do goodness)
and but to kiss ye only: with this prayer,
(a prayer only to awake your pity)
and on her knees she made it; that this night
you 'ld bless her with your company at supper.
I like this well, and now I think on it better,
I'll make a present use from this occasion:
Nay, good my Lord, be not so cruel to her because she has been yours.
and to mine own end
a rare way I will work.
Can love for ever,
the love of her (my Lord) so perish in ye?
as ye desire in your desires to prosper.
What gallant under heaven, but Anjou's heir then
can brag so fair a wife, and sweet a Mistress?
good noble Lord.
Ye mis-apply me, Mary,
nor do I want true pity to your Lady:
Pity and love tell me, too much I have wronged her
to dare to see her more: yet •f her sweetness
can entertain a mediation,
and it must be a great one that can cure me;
my love again, as far as honour bids me,
my service and my self.
That's nobly spoken.
Shall hourly see her; want shall never know her;
nor where she has bestowed her love, repent her.
Now whither drives he?
I have heard, Maria,
that no two women in the world more loved,
then thy good Mistress, and Gentilles fair daughter.
What may this mean? You have heard a truth, my Lord:
but since the secret love betwixt you two,
my Mistress durst not entertain such friendship;
Casta is quick, and of a piercing judgement,
and quickly will find out a flaw.
Hold Marie:
shrink not, it is good gold, wench: prepare a Banquet,
and get that Casta thither; for she's a creature
so full of forcible divine persuasion,
and so unwearied ever with good office,
and she shall cure my ill cause to my Mistress,
and make all errors up.
I'll doe my best Sir:
But shoe's too fearful, coy, and scrupulous,
to leave her fathers house so late; and bashful
at any mans appearance, that I fear Sir,
twill prove impose•le.
There's more gold, Marie,
and fain thy Mistress wondrous sick to death, wench.
I have ye in the wind now, and I'll pay ye.
She cannot choose but come; it is charity,
the chief of her profession: undertake this,
and I am there at night; if not, I leave ye.
I will not loose this offer, though it fall out
clean cross to that we cast. I'll undertake it,
I will, my Lord; she shall be there.
By —?
By — she shall.
Let it be something late then,
for being seen. Now force or favour wins her.
My spirits are grown dull, strong wine, and store,
shall set 'em up again, and make me fit
to draw home at the enterprise I aim at. 
Go thy ways, false Lord, if thou hold, thou pai'st
the price of all thy lusts. Thou shalt be three,
thou modest maid, if I have any working,
and yet thy honour safe; for which this thief
I know has set this meeting: but I'll watch him.
Maria.
Are mine eyes mine own? or bless me,
am I deluded with a flying shadow?
Why do your start so from me?
It speaks sensibly,
and shows a living body: yet I am fearful.
Give me your hand, good Maria.
He feels warm too.
And next your lips.
He kisses perfectly.
Nay, and the devil be no worse: you are Perolot.
I was, and sure I should be: Can a small distance,
and ten short months take from your memory
the figure of your friend, that you stand wondering?
Be not amazed, I am the self-same Perolot,
living, and well; Son to Gentile, and Brother
to virtuous Casta; to your beauteous Mistress,
the long since poor betrothed, and still vowed servant.
Nay, sure he lives. My Lord Level, your Master,
brought news long since to your much mourning Mistress,
ye died at Orleans; bound her with an oath too,
to keep it secret from your aged Father,
lest it should rack his heart.
A pretty secret
to try my Mistress love, and make my welcome
from travel of more worth; from whence, heaven thanked,
my business for the Duke dispatched to the purpose,
and all my money spent, I am come home, wench.
How does my Mistress? for I have not yet seen
any, nor will I, till I doe her service.
But did the Lord Level know of your love, Sir,
before ye went?
Yes: by much force he got it,
but none else knew; upon his promise too
and honour to conceal it faithfully
till my return; to further which, he told me,
my business being ended, from the Duke
he would procure a pension for my service,
able to make my Mistress a fit husband.
But are you sure of this?
Sure as my sight, wench.
Then is your Lord a base dissembling villain,
a devil Lord, the damned Lord of all lewdness,
and has betrayed ye' and undone my Mistress,
my poor sweet Mistress: Oh that lecher Lord,
who, poor soul, since was married.
To whom, Maria?
To that unlucky Lord, a —upon him;
whose hot horse-appetite being allied once
with her chaste joys, married again, scarce cooled,
the torches yet not out the yellow Hymen
lighted about the bed, the songs yet sounding,
Marine's young noble daughter Helena,
whose mischief stands at door next. O that Recreant!
O villain! O most unmanly falsehood!
nay then I see, my letters were betrayed too.
O, I am full of this, great with his mischiefs,
laden and burst: Come lead me to my Lady.
I cannot, Sir, Level keeps her concealed.
Besides, her griefs are such, she will see no man.
I must and will go to her: I will see her:
there be my friend, or this shall be thy furthest.
Hold, and I'll help ye: But first ye shall swear to me,
as you are true and gentle, as ye hate
this beastly and base Lord, where I shall place ye,
(which shall be within sight) till I discharge ye,
what-ere you see or hear, to make no motion.
I doe by —
Stay here about the house then,
till it be later; yet the time's not perfect:
there at the back-door I'll attend you truly.
O monstrous, monstrous, beastly villain.
How cross this falls, and from all expectation?
and what the end shall be, heaven only yet knows:
only I wish, and hope. But I forget still,
Casta must be the bait, or all miscarries.
Holla, Shaloon.
Who's there?
A word from the Duke, Sir.
Your pleasure.
Tell your Lord he must to Court strait.
He is ill at ease, and prays he may be pardoned
the occasions of this night.
Belike, he is drunk then:
he must away; the Duke, and his fair Lady,
the beauteous Helena, are now at Cent;
of whom she has such fortune in her carding,
the Duke has lost a thousand Crowns, and swears,
hee will not go to bed, till by Level
the tide of loss be turned again. Awake him,
for it is the pleasure of the Duke he must rise.
Having so strict command (Sir) to the contrary,
I dare not do it: I beseech your pardon.
Are you sure he is there?
Yes.
And asleep?
I think so.
And are you sure you will not tell him, Shalon?
Yes, very sure.
Then I am sure, I will.
Open, or I must force.
Pray ye stay: he is not,
nor will not be this night. You may excuse it.
I knew he was gone about some women's labour.
As good a neighbour, though I say it, and as comfortable:
many such more we need Shaloon. Alas, poor Lady,
thou art like to lie crosse-legg'd to night. Good Monsieur,
I will excuse your Master for this once, Sir,
because sometimes I have loved a wench my self too.
It is a good hearing Sir.
But for your lye, Shaloon,
if I had you here, it should be no good hearing,
for your pate I would pummel.
A fair good night, Sir.
Good night, thou noble Knight, Sir Pandarus.
My heart is cold of the sudden, and a strange dullness
possesses all my body: thy will be done heaven.
Faith friend, I was even going to my bed,
when your maid told me of your sudden sickness:
but from my grave (so truly I love you)
I think your name would raise me: ye look ill
since last I saw ye, much decayed in colour:
yet I thanck heaven, I find no such great danger
as your maid frighted me withal: take courage
and give your sickness course: some grief you have got
that feeds within upon your tender spirits,
and wanting open way to vent it self
murders your mind, and chokes up all your sweetness,
It was my maids fault; worthy friend to trouble ye,
so late, upon so light a cause: yet sure I have ye
O my dear Casta.
Out with it Gods name.
The closet of my heart, I will lock here, wench,
and things shall make ye tremble. Who's that knocks there?
It is Level.
Sit you still. Let him in.
In am resolved, and all you wronged women,
you noble spirits, that as I have suffered
under this glorious beast-insulting man,
lend me your causes, then your cruelties,
for I must put on madness above women.
Why do you look so ghastly?
Peace; no harm, Deer. 
There, take my cloak and sword: Where is this Banquet?
In the next room,
How came he here? Heaven bless me.
Give me some wine wench; fill it full, and sprightly.
Sit still, and be not fearful.
Till my veins swell,
and my strong sinews stretch like that brave Centaur
that at the table snatched the Bride away
in spite of Hercules.
I am betrayed.
Nay start not Lady; it is for you that I come,
and for your beauty: it is for you, Level
honours this night; to you, the sacred shrine
I humbly bow, offering my vows and prayers;
to you I live.
In with the powder quickly:
so, that and the wine will rock ye.
Here, to the health
of the most beauteous and divine, fair Casta,
the star of sweetness.
Fear him not, I'll die first.
And who shall pledge ye?
Thou shalt, thou tanned Gypsy:
and worship to that brightness give, cold Tartar.
By — ye shall not stir; ye are my Mistress,
the glory of my love, the great adventure,
the Mistress of my heart, and she my whore.
Thou lie, base, beastly Lord; drunker then anger,
thou soused Lord, got by a surfeit, thou lie basely.
Nay, stir not; I dare tell thee so. Sit you still.
If I be whore, it is in marrying thee,
that art so absolute and full a villain,
no Sacrament can save that piece tied to thee.
How often hast thou wooed in those flatteries,
almost those very words, my constancy?
what goddess have I not been, or what goodness?
what star that is of any name in heaven,
or brightness? which of all the virtues
(but drunkenness, and drabbing, thy two morals)
have not I reached to? what Spring was ever sweeter?
what Scythian snow so white? what crystal chaster?
Is not thy new wife now the same too? Hang thee,
base Bigamist, thou honour of ill women.
How's this? O heaven defend me.
Thou salt-itch;
for whom no cure but ever burning brimstone
can be imagined.
Ha, ha, ha.
Dost thou laugh, thou breaker
of all law, all religion, of all faith
thou foul contemner?
Peace, thou paltry woman:
and sit by me, Sweet.
By the Devil?
Come,
and lull me with delights.
It works amain now.
Give me such kisses as the Queen of shadows
gave to the sleeping boy she stole on •atmus;
lock round about in snaky wreathes close folded,
those rosie arms about my neck, O Venus.
Fear not, I say.
Thou admirable sweetness,
distill thy blessings like those silver drops,
that falling on fair grounds, rise all in roses:
Shoot me a thousand darts from those fair eyes,
and through my heart transfix 'em all, I'll stand 'em.
Send me a thousand smiles, and presently
I'll catch 'em in mine eyes, and by Love's power
turn 'em to Cupids all, and fling 'em on thee.
How high she looks, and heavenly! More wine for me.
Give him more wine, and good friend be not fearful.
Here on my knee, thou goddess of delights,
this lusty grape I offer to thy Beauties;
see how it leaps to view that perfect redness
that dwells upon thy lips: now, how it blushes
to be outblush'd. Oh let me feed my fancy,
and as I hold the purple god in one hand
dancing about the brim' and proudly swelling,
decked in the pride of nature young, and blowing;
so let me take fair Simile in the other,
and sing the loves of gods, then drink, their Nectar's
not yet desired.
Oh.
Then like lusty Tarquin
turned into flames with Lucrece coy denials,
his blood and spirit equally ambitious,
I force thee for mine own.
O help me, Justice:
help me, my Chastity.
Now I am bravely quarried. 
It is my Sister.
No, bawdy slave, no Treacher, she is not carried.
She's loose again, and gone. I'll keep my place still.
Now it works bravely: stand, he cannot hurt ye.
O my sweet Love, my life. 
He sinks.
My blessing.
So, now he is safe a while.
Lock all the doors, wench,
then for my wrongs.
Now I'll appear to know all.
Be quick, quick, good Marie, sure and sudden.
Stay, I must in first.
Of my conscience
it is young Perolet: O my stung conscience!
it is my first and noblest Love.
Leave wondering,
and recollect your self: the man is living,
equally wronged as you, and by that devil.
It is most true, Lady: your unhappy fortune
I grieve for as mine own, your fault forgive too,
if it be one. This is no time for kisses:
I have heard all, and known all, which mine ears
are cracked apiece with, and my heart perished.
I saw him in your chamber, saw his fury,
and am afire till I have found his heart out.
What do you mean to doe? for I'll make one.
To make his death more horrid (for he shall die)
He must, he must.
we'll watch him till he wakes,
then bind him, and then torture him.
It is nothing.
No, take him dead drunk now without repentance,
his lechery inseam'd upon him.
Excellent.
I'll do it my self; and when it is done, provide ye,
for we'll away for Italy this night.
We'll follow thorough all hazards.
O false Lord,
unmanly, mischievous; how I could curse thee.
But that but blasts thy fame; have at thy heart, fool:
loop-holes I'll make enough to let thy life out.
Oh, does the devil ride me?
Nay then.
Murder.
Nay, then take my share too.
Help; Oh, he has slain me.
Bloody intentions must have blood.
Ho?
Heaven.
He sinks, he sinks, for ever sinks: O fortune!
O sorrow, how like seas thou flowest upon me!
Here will I dwell for ever. Weep, Maria,
weep this young mans misfortune: O thou truest.
What have I done?
That that has marked thy soul man.
And art thou come again, thou dismal spirit?
Yes, to devour thy last.
Mercy upon me.
Thy hour is come: Succession, honour, pleasure,
and all the lustre thou so long hast looked for
must here have end: Summon thy sins before thee.
O my affrighted soul!
There lies a black one;
thy own best servant by thy own hand slain,
thy drunkenness procured it: There's another,
think of fair Gabriella, there she weeps;
and such tears are not lost.
O miserable!
Thy foul intention to the virtuous Casta.
No more, no more, thou wild-fire.
Last, thy last wife,
think on the wrong she suffers.
O my misery,
oh, whither shall I fly?
Thou hast no faith, fool.
Hark to thy knell. 
Millions of sins muster about mine eyes now:
murders, ambitions, lust, false faiths; O horror,
in what a stormy form of death thou rid'st now!
Me thinks I see all tortures, fires, and frosts,
deep sinking caves, where nothing but despair dwells,
the baleful birds of night hovering about 'em;
a grave, me thinks, now opens, and a hearse
hung with my Arms tumbles into it: oh,
oh, my afflicted soul: I cannot pray;
and the least child that has but goods in him
may strike my head off; so stupid are my powers:
I'll lift mine eyes up though.
Cease these laments,
they are too poor for vengeance: Level lives yet.
Then thus I dry all sorrows from these eyes,
fury and rage possess 'em now: damned devil.
Ho?
This for young Perolot.
O mercy, mercy.
This for my wrongs.
But one short hour to cure me.
oh be not cruel: Oh, oh.
Hark, they knock.
make haste for heavens sake, Mistress.
This for Casta.
Oh, O, O, O. 
He's dead: come quickly, let 's away with him,
't will be too late else.
Help, help up to the chamber.
What frights are these?
I am sure here's one past frighting.
Bring the lights nearer: I have enough already.
Out, out, mine eyes. Look, Casta.
'T is young Perolot.
When came he over? Hold the Gentlewoman,
she sinks; and bear her off.
O my dear brother! 
There is a time for all; for me, I hope, too,
and very shortly. Murdered?
Who 's above there?
Look up, and see.
What may this mean?
Behold it;
behold the drunken murderer
of that young Gentleman; behold the rankest,
the vilest, basest slave that ever flourished.
Who killed him?
I; and there 's the cause I did it:
read, if your eyes will give you leave.
Oh monstrous.
Nay, out it shall: there, take this false heart to ye,
the base dishonour of a thousand women:
keep it in gold, Duke, 't is a precious jewel.
Now to my self; for I have lived a fair age,
longer by some months then I had a mind to.
Hold.
Here, young Perolot; my first contracted
true love shall never go alone.
Hold, Gabriella,
I do forgive all.
I shall die the better.
Thus let me seek my grave, and my shames with me.
Nor shalt thou go alone my noble Mistress:
why should I live, and thou dead?
Save the wench there.
She is; I hope; and all my sins here written.
This was a fatal night.
Heaven has his working,
which we cannot contend against.
Alas.
Your Grace has your alas too.
Would 't were equal;
for thou hast lost an honest noble child.
'T is heir enough has lost a good remembrance.
See all their bodies buried decently,
though some deserved it not. How do you, Lady?
Even with your Graces leave, ripe for a Monastery;
there will I wed my life to tears and prayers,
and never know what man is more.
Your pleasure;
how does the maid within?
She is gone before, Sir,
the same course that my Lady takes.
And my course shall be my Beads at home; so
please your Grace to give me leave to leave the Court.
In peace, Sir,
and take my love along.
I shall pray for ye.
Now to our selves retire we, and begin
by this example to correct each sin. 
By this we plainly view the two imposthumes
that choke a kingdoms welfare; Ease, and Wantonness;
in both of which Level was capital:
for first, Ease stole away his mind from honour,
that active noble thoughts had kept still working,
and then delivered him to drink and women,
lust and outrageous riot; and what their ends are,
how infamous and foul, we see example.
Therefore, that great man that will keep his name,
and gain his merit out of Virtues schools,
must make the pleasures of the world his fools.
From this sad sight ascend your noble eye,
And see old Time helping triumphantly
helping his Master Man: view here his vanities,
and see his false friends like those glutted flies,
that when they 've sucked their fill, fall off, and fade
from all remembrance of him, like a shade.
And last, view who relieves him; and that gone,
We hope your favour, and our Play is done.
What hast thou done, Desire, and how employed
the charge I gave thee, about levying wealth
for our supplies?
I have done all, yet nothing:
tried all, and all my ways, yet all miscarried;
there dwells a sordid dullness in their minds.
Thou son of earth, colder then that thou art made of,
I came to Craft, found all his hooks about him,
and all his nets baited and set; his sly self
and greedy Lucre at a se•ious conference
which way to tie the world within their statutes a
business of all sides and of all sorts swarming
like Bees broke loose in summer: I declared
your will and want together, both enforcing
with all the power and pains I had, to reach him;
yet all fell short.
His answer.
This he gave me.
Your wants are never ending; and those supplies
that came to stop those breaches, are ever lavished
before they reach the main, in toys and trifles,
gewgaws, and gilded puppets: Vain delight
he says has ruined ye, with clapping all
that comes in for support, on clothes, and Coaches,
perfumes, and powdered pates; and that your Mistress,
the Lady Pleasure, like a sea devours
at length both you and him too. If you have houses,
or land, or jewels, for good pawn, he'll hear you,
and will be ready to supply occasions;
if not, he locks his ears up, and grows stupid.
From him, I went to Vanity▪ whom I found
attended by an endless troop of Tailors,
Mercers, Embroiderers, Feather-makers, Fumers,
all Occupations opening like a Mart,
that serve to rig the body out with bravery;
and th'row the room new fashions flew like flies,
in thousand gaudie shapes; Pride waiting on her,
and busily surveying all the breaches
Time and delaying Nature had wrought in her,
which still with art she pieced again, and strengthened:
I told your wants; she showed me gowns and head-tires,
embroidered waistcoats, smocks seemed thorough with cut-works,
scarfs, mantles, petticoats, muffs, powders, paintings,
dogs, monkeys, parrots, which all seemed to show me
the way her money went. From her to Pleasure
I took my journey.
And what says our best Mistress?
She danced me out this answer presently:
Revels and Masques had drawn her dry already.
I met old Time too, mowing mankind down,
who says you are too hot, and he must purge ye.
A cold quietus. Miserable creatures,
born to support and beautify your master,
the godlike man, set here to do me service,
the children of my will; why, or how dare ye,
created to my use alone, disgrace me?
Beasts have more curtsy; they live about me,
offering their warm wool to the shearers hand,
to clothe me with their bodies to my labours;
nay, even their lives they daily sacrifice,
and proudly press with garlands to the altars,
to fill the gods oblations. Birds bow to me,
striking their downy sails to do me service,
their sweet airs ever echoing to mine honour,
and to my rest their plume softs they send me.
Fishes, and plants, and all where life inhabits,
but mine own cursed kind, obey their ruler;
mine have forgot me, miserable mine,
into whose stony hearts, neglect of duty,
squint-ey'd deceit, and self-love, are crept closely:
none feel my wants, not one mend with me.
None, Sir?
Thou hast forgot (Desire) thy best friend, Flattery;
he cannot fail me.
Fail? he will sell himself,
and all within his power, close to his skin first.
I thought so too, and made him my first venture,
but found him in a young Lords ear so busy,
so like a smiling shower pouring his soul
in at his portals, his face in thousand figures
catching the vain mind of the man: I pulled him,
but still he hung like birdlime; spoke unto him,
his answer still was, By the Lord, sweet Lord,
and By my soul, thou master-piece of honour;
nothing could stave him off: he has heard your flood's gone;
and on decaying things he seldom smiles, Sir.
Then here I break up state, and free my followers,
putting my fortune now to Time, and Justice:
go seek new masters now; for Anthropos
neglected by his friends, must seek new fortunes.
Desire, to Avarice I here commend thee,
where thou may live at full bent of thy wishes:
and Vain Delight, thou feeder of my follies
with light fantasticness, be thou in favour.
To leave thee, Bounty, my most worthy servant,
troubles me more then mine own misery;
but we must part: go plant thy self, my best friend,
in honourable hearts that truly know thee,
and there live ever like thy self, a virtue:
but leave this place, and seek the Country
for Law; and lust like fire lick all up here.
Now none but Poverty, must follow me,
despised patched Poverty; and we two married,
will seek Simplicity, Content and Peace out,
and live with them in exile. How uncalled on
my true friend comes!
Here, hold thee, Anthropos,
thou art almost armed at rest; put this on,
a penitential robe, to purge thy pleasures:
off with that vanity.
Here, Vain Delight,
and with this all my part, to thee again
of thee I freely render.
Take this staff now,
and be more constant to your steps hereafter:
the staff is Staidness of affections.
Away, you painted flies, that with mans summer
take life and heat buzzing about his blossoms;
when growing full, ye turn to Caterpillars,
gnawing the root that gave you life. Fly shadows.
Now to Content I'll give thee, Anthropos,
to Rest and Peace: no vanity dwells there;
Desire nor Pleasure, to delude thy mind more;
no Flatteries smooth-fil'd tongue shall poison thee.
O Jupiter, if I have ever offered
upon thy burning Altars but one Sacrifice
thou and thy fair-ey'd Juno smiled upon;
if ever, to thine honour, bounteous feasts,
where all thy statues sweat with wine and incense,
have by the son of earth been celebrated:
hear me (the child of shame now) hear, thou helper,
and take my wrongs into thy hands, thou justice,
done by unmindful man, unmerciful,
against his master done, against thy order;
and raise again, thou father of all honour,
the poor despised, but yet thy noblest creature.
Raise from his ruins once more this sunk Cedar,
that all may fear thy power, and I proclaim it.
Hoe; Mercury, my winged son.
Your servant.
Whose powerful prayers were those that reached our ears,
armed in such spells of pity now?
The sad petitions
of the scorned son of earth, the godlike Anthropos,
he that has swelled your sacred fires with incense,
and piled upon your altars thousand heifers;
he that (beguiled by Vanity and Pleasure,
Desire, Craft, Flattery, and smooth Hypocrisy)
stands now despised and ruined, left to Poverty.
It must not be; he was not raised for ruin;
nor shall those hands heaved at mine altars perish:
he is our noblest creature. Flee to Time,
and charge him presently release the bands
of Poverty and Want this suitor sinks in:
tell him, among the sun-burnt Indians,
that know no other wealth but peace and pleasure,
she shall find golden Plutus, god of riches,
who idly is adored, the innocent people
not knowing yet what power and weight he carries:
bid him compel him to his right use, honour,
and presently to live with Anthropos.
It is our will. Away.
I do obey it.
Rise, and away; 't is Joves command.
I will not:
ye have some fool to furnish now; some Midas
that to no purpose I must choke with riches.
Who must I go to?
To the son of earth;
he wants the god of wealth.
Let him want still:
I was too lately with him, almost torn
into ten thousand pieces by his followers:
I could not sleep, but Craft or Vanity
were filing off my fingers; not eat, for fear
Pleasure would cast her self into my belly,
and there surprise my heart.
These have forsaken him:
make haste then; thou must with me: be not angry,
for fear a greater anger light upon thee.
I do obey then: but change my figure;
for when I willingly befriend a creature,
goodly and full of glory I show to him;
but when I am compelled, old, and decrepit,
I halt, and hang upon my staff. Fare well, friends,
I will not be long from ye; all my servants
I leave among ye still, and my chief riches.
O Time, what innocence dwells here, what goodness!
they know me not, nor hurt me not, yet hug me.
Away, I'll follow thee: but not too fast, Time.
Man, be not sad, nor let this divorce
from Mundus, and his many ways of pleasure,
afflict thy spirits; which considered rightly
with inward eyes, makes thee arrive at happy.
For now what danger or deceit can reach thee?
what matter left for Craft or Covetize
to plot against thee? what Desire to burn thee?
O son of earth, let Honesty possess thee;
be as thou wast intended, like thy Maker;
see thorough those gaudy shadows, that like dreams
have dwelt upon thee long: call up thy goodness,
thy mind and man within thee, that lie shipwrecked,
and then how thin and vain these fond affections,
how lame this worldly love, how lumplike raw
and ill-digested all these vanities
will show, let Reason tell thee,
Crown thy mind
with that above the worlds wealth, joyful suffering,
and truly be the master of thy self,
which is the noblest Empire; and there stand
the thing thou were ordained, and set to govern.
Come, let us sing the worlds shame: hear us, Anthropos.
Away; we are betrayed.
Get thou too after,
thou needy bare companion; go for ever,
for ever, I conjure thee: make no answer.
What make thou here, Time? thou that to this
minute never stood'st still by me?
I have brought thee succour;
and now catch hold, I am thine: The god of riches
(compelled by him that saw thy miseries,
the ever just and wakeful Jove, at length)
is come unto thee: use him as thine own;
for 't is the doom of heaven: he must obey thee.
Have I found pity then?
Thou hast; and Justice
against those false seducers of thine honour:
Come, give him present helps.
Come, Industry,
thou friend of life: and next to thee, rise Labour;
rise presently: and now to your employments;
but first conduct this mortal to the rock.
What see thou now?
A glorious mine of metal.
O Jupiter, my thanks.
To me a little.
And to the god of wealth my Sacrifice.
Nay, then I am rewarded. Take heed now, son,
you are afloat again, lest Mundus catch ye.
Never betray me more.
I must to India,
from whence I came, where my main wealth lies buried,
and these must with me. Take that book and mattock,
and by those know to live again.
I shall do.
Thorough all the world the fortune of great Andre.
be known and wondered at; his riches envied
as far as Sun or Time is; his power feared too.
Take heed, weak man, those are the sins that sunk thee:
trust 'em no more: kneel, and give thanks to Jupiter.
O mighty power!
Unmask, ye gilded poisons:
now look upon 'em, son of earth, and shame 'em;
now see the faces of thy evil angels,
lead 'em to Time, and let 'em fill his Triumph:
their memories be here forgot for ever.
O just great god! how many lives of service,
what ages only given to thine honour,
what infinites of vows and holy prayers,
can pay my thanks?
Rise up: and to assure thee
that never more thou shalt feel want, strike, Mercury,
strike him; and by that stroke he shall for ever
live in that rock of gold, and still enjoy it.
Be done, I say. Now sing in honour of him.
By this we note (sweet heart) in Kings and Princes
a weakness, even in spite of all their wisdoms,
and often to be mastered by abuses:
Our natures here described too, and what humours
prevail above our Reasons to undo us.
But this the last and best, When no friend stands,
The gods are merciful, and lend their hands.
Now as the Husbandman, whose Costs and Pain,
Whose Hopes and Helps lie buried in his Grain,
Waiting a happy Spring, to ripen full
His long'd-for Harvest to the Reapers pull;
Stand we expecting, having sown our Ground
with so much charge (the fruitfulness not found)
the Harvest of our Labours: For we know
You are our Spring; and when you smile, we grow.
Nor Charge nor Pain shall bind us from your Pleasures,
So you but lend your hands to fill our Measures.

