WHy doe you grieve thus still?
'Twold melt a Marble
And tame a savage man, to feel my fortune.
What fortune? I have lived this 30. years
And run through all these follies you call fortunes
Yet never fixed on any good, and constant,
But what I made my self: why should I grieve then,
And that I may mould any way?
You are wide still.
You love a gentlewoman, a young handsome woman,
I have loved a thousand, not so few.
You are disposed.
You hope to marry her; it is a lawful calling
And prettily esteemed of, but take heed then,
Take heed dear brother of a stranger fortune
Then ere you felt yet; fortune my foe is a friend to it.
It is true I love, dearly, and truly love,
A noble, virtuous, and most beauteous maid,
And am beloved again.
That's too much a conscience
To love all these would run me out ô my wits.
Prithee give ear, I am to marry her
Dispatch it then, and I'll go call the Piper.
But ô the wicked Customs of this country
The barbarous, most inhumane, damned Custom
It is true, to marry is a custom
In the world; for look you brother,
Wooed any man, stand plucking for the Ace of Harts,
With one pack of cards all days on's life?
You doe not
Or else you purpose not to understand me
Proceed, I will give care.
They have a Custom
In this most beastly country, out upon it.
Lets hear it first.
That when a maid is contracted
And ready for the tie of the Church, the Governor,
He that commands in chief, must have her maiden-head
Or ransom it for money at his pleasure.
How might a man achieve that place? a rare custom?
An admirable rare custom: and none excepted?
None, none.
The rarer still: how could I lay about me?
In this rare office? are they born to it, or chosen?
Both equal damnable.
Me thinks both excellent
Would I were the next heir
To this mad fortune
Am I now come, my marriage is proclaimed.
And nothing can redeem me from this mischief,
Shees very young;
Yes.
And fair I dare proclaim her
Else mine eyes fail,
Fair as the bud unblasted.
I cannot blame him then if it were mine own case.
I would not go an ace less
Fie Rutillio
Why do you make your brothers misery
Your sport and game?
There is no pastime like it
I looked for your advice, your timely counsel,
How to avoid this blow, not to be mocked at,
And my afflictions jeered.
I tell thee Arnoldo,
An thou were my Father, as thou art but my brother,
My younger brother too, I must be merry
And where there is a wench it can, a young wench,
A handsome wench, and sooner a good turn too,
An I were to be hanged, thus must I handle it.
But you shall see Sir, I can change this habit
To doe you any service; advise what you please,
And see with what devotion I'll attend it?
But yet me thinks, I am taken with this custom.
And could pretend to'th place.
Draw off a little?
Here comes my Mistress and her Father.
IN dainty wench;
Wooed might farm his Custom
My dear daughter,
Now to bethink your self of new advice
Will be too late, later this timeless sorrow,
No price, nor prayers, can infringe the fate
Your beauty hath cast on you, my best Zenocia,
Be ruled by me, a Fathers care directs ye,
Look on the Count, look cheerfully and sweetly;
What though he have the power to possess ye,
To pluck your maiden honour, and then slight ye
By custom, unresistable to enjoy you;
Yet my sweet child, so much your youth and goodness
The beauty of your soul, and Saint-like modesty,
H•ve won upon his wilde mind, so much charmed
That all power laid aside, what Law allows him,
Or sudden in fires, kindled from those bright eyes,
He sues to be your servant, fairly, nobly
Forever to be tied your faithful Husband:
Consid•r my best child:
I have considered
The blessedness that this breeds too, consider
Besides your Fathers Honour, your own peace,
The banishment for ever of this custom
This base and barbarous use, for after once
He has found the happiness of holy marriage
And what it is to grow up with one beauty,
How he will scorn and kick at such a heritage
Left him by lust and lewd progenitors.
All Virgins too, shall bless your name, shall Saint it,
And like so many Pilgrims go to your shrine,
When time has turned your beauty into ashes,
Filled with your pious memory.
Good Father
Hide not that bitter pill, I loath to swallow
In such sweet words:
The Count's a handsome Gentleman,
And having him, you're certain of a fortune,
A high and noble fortune to attend you:
Where if you fling your love upon this stranger
This young Arnoldo, not knowing from what place
Or honourable strain of blood he is sprung, you venture
All your own sweets, and my long cares to nothing,
Nor are you certain of his faith; why may not that
Wander as he does, every where?
No more Sir;
I must not hear, I dare not hear him wronged thus,
Virtue is never wounded, but I suffer.
It is an ill office in your age, a poor one,
To judge thus weakly: and believe your self too,
A weaker to betray your innocent daughter,
To his intemp'rate, rude, and wilde embraces,
She hates as Heaven hates falsehood.
A good wench,
She sticks close to you Sir.
His faith uncertain?
The nobleness his virtue springs from, doubted?
De'e doubt tic day now? or when your body's perfect,
Your stomachs well disposed, your pulses temperate,
De'e doubt you are in health? I tell you Father,
One hour of this mans goodness, this mans Nobleness
Put in the scale, against the Counts whole being,
Forgive his lusts too, which are half his life,
He could no more endure to hold weight with him;
Arnoldoes very looks, are fair examples;
His common and indifferent actions,
Rules and strong ties of virtue: he has my first love,
To him in sacred vow I have given this body,
In him my mind inhabits.
Good wench still
And till he fling me off, as undeserving
Which I confess I am, of such a blessing,
But would be loath to find it so—
O never;
Never my happy Mistress, never, never,
When your poor servant lives but in your favour,
One foot it'h grave, the other shall not linger,
What sacrifice of thanks, what age of service,
What danger, of more dreadful look then death,
What willing martyrdom to crown me constant
May merit such a goodness, such a sweetness?
A love so Nobly great, no power can ruin;
Most blessed maid go on, the gods that gave this,
This pure unspotted love, the child of Heaven,
In their own goodness, must preserve and save it
And raise you a reward, beyond our recompēce;
I ask but you, a pure maid to possess,
And then they have crowned my wishes: If I fall then
Go seek some better love, mine will debase you.
A pretty innocent fool; well Governor,
Though I think well of your custom, &amp; could wish my self
For this night in your place, heartily wish it:
Yet if you play not fair play, and above board too,
I have a foolish gin here, I say no more;
I'll tell you what &amp; if your honours guts are not enchanted
I should now chide you Sir, for so declining
The goodness and the grace you have ever showed me,
And your own virtue too, in seeking rashly
To violate that love heaven has appointed,
To wrest your daughters thoughts, part that affection
That both our hearts have tied &amp; seek to give it,
To a wild fellow, that would weary her;
A Cannibal, that feeds on the heads of maids,
Then flings their bones and bodies to the Devil,
Would any man of discretion venture such a gristle,
To the rude claws of such a Cat-a-mountain?
You had better tear her between • Oaks, a Town bull
Is a mere Stoic to this fellow, a grave Philosopher,
And a Spanish Janet, a most virtuous Gentleman.
Does this seem handsome Sir?
Though I confess
Any man would desire to have her, and by any means,
At any rate too, yet that this common hang-man,
That hath whipped off the heads of a 1000. maids already
That he should glean the harvest, sticks in my stomach:
This rogue that breaks young wenches to the saddle,
And teaches them to stumble ever after;
That he should have her? for my brother now
That is a handsome young fellow; and well thought on,
And will deal tenderly in the business;
Or for my self that have a reputation,
And have studied the conclusions of these causes
And know the perfect manage, I'll tel you old Sir,
If I should call you wise Sir, I should belly you,
This thing you study to betray your child to.
This Maiden-monger. When you have done your best
And think you have fixed her in the point of honour
Who do you think you have tied her too? a Surgeon,
I must confess an excellent desector,
One that has cut up more young tender Lamb-pies—
What I speak Gentlemen, was mere compulsion
No Fathers free-will, nor did I touch your person,
With any edge of spite; or strain your loves
With any base, or hired persuasions; 
Witness thee tears, how well I wished your fortunes.
Theres some grace in thee yet, you are determined,
To marry this Count Lady,
Marry him Rutillio?
Marry him, and lye with him I mean,
You cannot mean that,
If you be a true Gentleman, you dare not,
The brother to this man, and one that loves him;
I'll marry the Devil first
A better choice
And lay his horns by a hansomer bedfellow,
A cooler of my conscience
Pray let me ask you;
And my dear Mistress, be not angry with me
For what I shall propound, I am confident,
No promise, nor no power, can force your love,
I mean in way of marriage, never stir you,
Nor to forget my faith, no state can wound you.
But for this custom, which this wretched country
Hath wrought into a law, and must be satisfied;
Where all the pleas of honour, are but laughed at,
And modesty regarded as a may-game,
What shall be here considered? power we have none,
To make resistance, nor policy to cross it:
It is held religion too, to pay this duty.
I'll dye an Atheist then.
My noblest Mistress
Not that I with it so, but say it were so,
Say you did render up, part of your honour,
For whilst your will is clear, all cannot perish;
Say for one night, you entertained this monster
Should I esteem you worse, forced to this render?
Your mind I know is pure, and full as beauteous;
After this short eclipse, you would rise again
And shaking of that cloud, spread all your lustre
Who made you witty, to undo your self, Sir?
Or are you laden, with the love I bring you,
And fine would fling that burden on another?
Am I grown common in your eyes Arnoldo?
Old, or unworthy of your fellowship?
Dee think because a woman, I must err,
And therefore rather wish that fall before hand
Coloured with custom, not to be resisted?
Dee love as painters doe, only some pieces
Some certain handsome touches of your Mistress,
And let the mind pass by you, unexamined?
Be not abused; with what the maiden vessel
Is second first, you understand the proverb.
I am afraid, this thing will make me virtuous,
Should you lay by the least part of that love
You've sworn is mine, your youth &amp; faith has given me,
To entertain another, nay a fairer,
And make the case thus desperate, she must dye else;
Do ye think I would give way, or count this honest?
Be not deceived, these eyes should never see you more,
This tongue forget to name you, and this heart
Hate you, as if you were borne, my full Antipathy.
Empire and more imperious love, alone
Rule, and admit no rivals, the purest springs
When they are courted by lascivious land-floods,
Their maiden pureness, and their coolness perish.
And though they purge again to their first beauty,
The sweetness of their taste, is clean departed.
I must have all or none; and am not worthy
Longer the noble name of wife, Arnoldo,
Then I can bring a whole hart pure &amp; handsome.
I never shall deserve you: not to thank you;
You are so heavenly good, no man can reach you:
I am sorry I spake so rashly, t'was but to try you.
You might have tried a thousnd women so,
And 900, fourscore &amp; 19 should ha'followedy our counsel
Take heed of clapping spurs to such free cattle,
We must bethink us suddenly and constantly,
And wisely too, we expect no common danger.
Be most assured, I'll dye first.
An't come to that once,
The Devil pick his bones, that dyes a coward
I'll jog along with you, here comes the Stallion
How smug he looks upon the imagination
Of what he hopes to act? pox on your kidnes,
How they begin to melt? how big he bears
Sure he will leap before us all: what a sweet company
Of rogues and panders, wait upon his lewdness?
Plague of your chops, you have more handsome bitts,
Then a hundred honester men, and more deserving
How the dog leers.
You need not now be jealous
I speak at distance to your wife, but when the Priest has done
We shall grow nearer, and more familiar.
I'll watch you for that trick, baboon, I'll
Smoke you: the rogue swets, as if he had eaten
Grains, hee broils, if I doe come to the
Basting of you.
Your Lordship.
May happily speak this, to fright a stranger,
But it is not in your honour, to perform it;
The custom of this place, if such there be,
At best most damnable, may urge you to it,
But if you be an honest man you hate it,
How ever I will presently prepare
To make her mine, and most undoubtedly;
Believe you are abused, this custom feigned to,
And what you now pretend, most fair and virtuous.
Go and believe, a good belief does well Sir;
And you Sir, clear the place, but leave her here.
Your Lordships pleasure
That anon Arnoldo,
This is but talk
Shall we go off?
By any means
I know she has pious thoughts enough to guard her:
Besides, here is nothing due to him till the tie be done
Nor dare he offer.
Now doe I long to worry him:
Pray have a care to the main chance. 
Pray Sir fear not
Now, what say you to me?
Sir it becomes
The modesty, that maids are ever borne with,
To use few words.
Doe you see nothing in me
Nothing to catch your eyes nothing of wonder,
The common mould of men, come short, and want in?
Doe you read no future fortune for your self here?
And what a happiness, it may be to you,
To have him honour you, all women aim at?
To have him love you Lady, that man love you,
The best, and the most beauteous, have run mad for?
Look and be wise, you have a favour offered you
I doe not every day propound to women;
You are a pretty one: and though each hour,
I am glutted, with the sacrifice of beauty,
I may be brought, as you may handle it,
To cast so good a grace and liking on you,
You understand, come kiss me, and be joyful,
I give you leave.
Faith Sir, twill not show handsome;
Our sex his blushing, full of fear, unskild too,
In these alarms.
Learn then and be perfect
I doe beseech your honour pardon me,
And take some skilful one, can hold you play,
I am a fool.
I tell thee maid I love thee,
Let that word make thee happy, so far love thee,
That though I may enjoy thee without ceremony,
I will descend so lowe, to marry thee,
Me thinks I see the race, that shall spring from us,
Some Princes, some great Soldiers
I am afraid.
Your honours cozened in this calculation;
For certain, I shall ne'er have a child by you.
Why?
Because I must not think to marry you,
I dare not Sir, the step betwixt your honour,
And my poor humble State.
I will descend to thee,
And buoy thee up.
I'll sink to the Center first,
Why would your Lordship marry, and confine that pleasure,
You ever have had freely cast upon you?
Take heed my Lord this marring is a mad matter,
Lighter a pair of shackles will hang on you,
And quieter a quartaine fever find you
If you wed me I must enjoy you only,
Your eyes must be called home, your thoughs in cages,
To sing to no ears then but mine; your hart bound
The custom, that your youth was ever nursed in,
Must be forgot, I shall forget my duty else,
And how that will appear,
We'll talk of that more
Besides I tell ye, I am naturally,
As all young women are, that show like handsome,
Exceeding proud, being cōmended, monstrous. 
Of an unquiet temper, seldom pleased.
Unless it be with infinite observance.
Which you were never bred to; once well angerd,
As every cross in us, provokes that passion,
And like a Sea, I roll, toss, and chase a week after.
And then all mischief I can think upon,
Abusing of your bed the least and poorest,
I tell you what you'll find, and in these fits,
This little beauty, you are pleased to honour,
Will be so changed, so altered to an ugliness,
To such a vizard, ten to one, I dye too,
Take it then upon my death you murderd me,
Away, away fool, why dost thou proclaim these
To prevent that in me, thou hast chosen in another
Him I have chosen, I can rule and master,
Temper to what I please, you are a great one
Of a strong will to bend, I dare not venture,
Be wise my Lord, and say you were well counseld,
Take money for my ransom, and forget me,
Twill be both safe, and noble for your honour,
And wheresoever my fortunes shall conduct me,
So worthy mentions I shall render of you
So virtuous and so fair.
You will not marry me:
I doe beseech your honour, be not angry
At what I say, I cannot love ye, dare not;
But such a ransom, for the flower you covet
No money, nor no prayers, shall redeem that,
Not all the art you have
Set your own price Sir.
Go to your wedding, never kneel to me
When that's done, you are mine, I will enjoy you:
Your tears do nothing, I will not loose my custom
To cast upon my self an Empires fortune
My mind shall not pay this custom, cruel man
Your body will content me: I'll look for you, 
Strew all your withered flowers, your Autumn sweets
By the hot Sun ravished of bud and beauty
Thus round about her Bride-bed hang those blacks there
The emblems of her honour lost; all joy
That leads a Virgin to receive her Lover,
Keep from this place all fellow-maides that bless her,
And blushing and unloose her Zone, keep from her:
No merry noise nor lusty songs be heard here,
Nor full cups crowned with wine, make the rooms giddy;
This is no masque of mirth, but murdered honour.
Sing mournfully that sad Epithalamion,
I gave thee now: and prithee let thy Lute weep.
How now, what livery's this? doe you call this a wedding?
This is more like a funeral.
It is one,
And my poor Daughter going to her grave,
To his most loathed embraces that gapes for her.
Make the Earls bed ready, is the marriage done Sir?
Yes they are knit; but must this slubberdegullion
Have her maiden-head now?
Theres no avoiding it?
And there's the scaffold where she must loose it.
The bed sir?
No way to wipe his mouldy chaps?
That we know
To any honest wel-deserving fellow,
And it were but to a merry Cobbler, I could sit still now,
I love the game so well, but that this puckfist,
This universal rutter, fare ye well Sir;
And if you have any good prayers, put 'em forward,
There may be yet a remedy.
I wish it, 
And all my best devotions offer to it.
Now is this tie dispathc'd?
I think it be Sir:
And my bed ready? 
There you may quickly find Sir,
Such a loathed preparation.
Never grumble,
Nor fling a discontent upon my pleasure
It must and shall be done: give me some wine,
And fill it till it leap upon my lips:
Here's to the foolish maiden head you wot of,
The toy I must take pains for
I beseech your Lord-ship
Load not a Fathers love,
Pledge it Charino,
Or by my life I'll make thee pledge thy last
And be sure she be a maid, a perfect Virgin,
(I will not have my expectation dul'd)
Or your old pate goes off. I am hot and fiery
And my blood beats alarms through my body
And fancy high. You of my guard retire,
And let me hear no noise about the lodging
But music and sweet airs, now fetch your daughter,
And bid the coy wench put on all her beauties,
All her enticements, out-blush damask roses,
And dim the breaking East with her bright Christalls.
I am all on fire, away
And I am frozen. 
Come fearless on
Nay an I budge from thee
Beat me with dirty sticks.
What Masque is this?
What pretty fancy to provoke me high?
The beauteous Huntress, fairer far, and sweeter;
Diana shows an Ethiop to this beauty
Protected by two Virgin Knights.
That's a lye,
A loud one, if you knew as much as I doe
The guard's dispersed
Fortune I hope invites us
I can no longer hold, she pulls my heart from me
Stand, &amp; stand fixed, move not a foot, nor speak not,
For if thou doest' upon this point thy death sits.
Thou miserable, base, and sordid lecher,
Thou scum of noble blood, repent and speedily,
Repent thy thousand thefts, from helpless virgins,
Their innocence betrayed to thy embraces.
The base dishonour, that thou doest to strangers,
In glorying to abuse the laws of marriage,
Thy Infamy thou hast flung upon thy country,
In nourishing this black and barbarous custom
My guard.
One word more, and thou die.
One syllable
That tends to any thing, but I beseech you,
And as you're Gentlemen tender my case,
And I'll thrust my javeling down thy throat
Thou Dogg-whelpe, thou, pox upon thee, what
Should I call the? Pompean,
Thou kiss my Lady? thou scour her chamber pot:
Thou have a maiden head? a motley coat,
You great blind fool, farewell and be hanged to ye,
Loose no time Lady.
Pray take your pleasure Sir,
And so we'll take our leaves
We are determined,
Dye, before yield
Honour, and a fair grave
Before a lust full bed, so for our fortunes.
Du cat a whee, good count, cry, prithee cry,
O what a wench hast thou lost? cry you great booby. 
And is she gone then, am I dishonoured thus
Consent and baffuld? my guard there no man answer?
My guard I say, Sir you knew of this plot.
Where are my guard? Isle have your life you villain.
You politic old thief.
Heaven send her far enough
And let me paye the ransom.
Did your honour call us?
Post every way, and presently recover,
The two strange Gentlemen, and the fair Lady,
This day was married Sir.
The same.
We saw i'm
Making with all maine speed to'th port.
Away villains. 
Recover her, or I shall dye; deal truly,
Did not thou know,
By all thats good I did not
If your honour mean their flight, to say I grieve for that,
Will be to lye; you may handle me as you please.
Be sure, with all the cruelty, with all the rigour,
For thou hast robbed me villain of a treasure.
How now?
They are all aboard, a bark rode ready for 'em,
And now are under sail and past recovery
Rig me a ship with all the speed that may be,
I will not loose her: thou her most false Father,
Shalt go along; and if I miss her, hear me,
Whole day will I study to destroy thee.
I shall be joyful of it; and so you'll find me.
I hear, and see, too much of him, and that
Compels me Madam, though unwillingly,
To wish I had no uncles part in him,
And much I fear, the comfort of a Son
You will not long enjoy.
It is not my fault,
And therefore from his guilt my innocence
Cannot be tainted, since his Fathers death
(Peace to his soul) a Mothers prayers and care,
Were never wanting, in his education.
His child-hood I pass, as being brought up
Under my wing; and growing ripe for study,
I overcame the tenderness, and joy
I had to look upon him, and provided
The choicest Masters, and of greatest name
Of Salamanca, in all liberal Arts.
To train his youth up.
I must witness that.
How there he prospered, to the admiration,
Of all that knew him, for a general scholar,
Being one of note, before he was a man,
Is still remembered in that Academy,
From thence I sent him to the Emperors court,
Attended like his Fathers Son and there
Maintained him, in such bravery and height,
As did become a courtier.
It was that spoiled him, my Nephew had been hapy
The court's a school indeed, in which some few
Learn virtuous principles, but most forget,
What ever they brought thither good and honest.
Trifling is there in practice, serious actions,
Are obsolete and out of use, my Nephew
Had been a happy man, had he ne'er known
What's there in grace, and fashion.
I have heard yet,
That while he lived in court, the Emperor
Took notice of his carriage and good parts,
The grandees did not scorn his company,
And of the greatest Ladies he was held,
A complete Gentleman.
He indeed danced well,
A turn of the toe, with a lofty trick or two,
To argue nimbleness, and a strong back,
Will go far with a Madam: it is most true,
That hoe's an excellent scholar, and he knows it;
An exact courtier, and he knows that too;
He has fought thrice, and come off still with honour,
Which he forgets not
Nor I have much reason.
To grieve his fortune that way,
You are mistaken,
Prosperity does search a Gentleman's temper,
More then his adverse fortune: I have known
Many, and of rare parts from their success
In private duels, raised up to such a pride,
And so transformed from what they were, that all
That loved them truly, wished they had fallen in them.
I need not write examples, in your soon,
It is too apparent; for ere Don Duarte,
Made trial of his valour, he indeed was
Admired for civil courtesy, but now
Hoe's swollen so high, out of his own assurance,
Of what he dares do, that he seeks occasions,
Unjust occasions, grounded on blind passion,
Ever to be in quarrels, and this makes him
Shunt of all fair societies.
Would it were
In my weak power to help it: I will use
With my entreaties the authority of a mother,
As you may of an Uncle, and enlarge it
With your command, as being a governor
To the great King in Lisborne.
Here he comes.
We are unseen, observe him.
Boy
My Lord.
What saith the spanish captain that I struck,
To my bold challenge?
He refused to read it.
Why did not leave it there?
I did my Lord,
But to no purpose, for he seems more willing
To sit down with the wrongs, then to repair
His honour by the sword; he knows too well,
That from your Lordship nothing can be got
But more blows, and disgraces.
Hoe's a wretch,
A miserable wretch, and all my fury
Is lost upon him; holds the masque, appointed
In the honour of Hippolita:
It is broke off.
The reason?
This was one, they heard your Lordship
Was by the Ladies choice to lead the dance,
And therefore they, too well assured how far
You would out shine i'm, gave it ore and said
They would not serve for foils to set you off.
They at their best are such, and ever shall be
Where I appear.
Doe you note his modesty?
But was there nothing else pretended?
Yes,
Young Don Alonzo, the great Captains Nephew,
Stood on comparisons.
With whom?
With you,
And openly professed, that all precedence,
His birth and state considered, was due to him
Nor were your Lordship to contend with one
So far above you.
I look down upon him
With such contempt and scorn, as on my slave,
Hoe's a name only, and all good in him,
He must derive, from his great grandsires ashes,
For had not their victorious acts bequeathed,
His titles to him, and wrote on his forehead,
This is a Lord, he had lived unobserved
By any man of mark, and died as one
Among the common route, compaire with me?
It is giant-like ambition; I know him,
And know my self, that man is truly noble,
And he may justly call that worth his own,
Which his deserts have purchased, I could wish
My birth were more obscure, my friends and kinsmen
Of lesser power, or that my provident Father,
Had been like to that riotous Emperor
That chose his belly for his only heir;
For being of no family then, and poor
My virtues whereso'er I lived, should make
That kingedome my inheritance.
Strange self love
For if I studied the countries laws,
I should so easily, sound all their depth,
And rise up such a wonder, that the pleaders,
That now are in most practice, and esteem
Should starve for want of clients: If I travelled,
Like wise Vlysses to see men and manners,
I would return in act, more knowing, then
Homer could fancy him; If a Physician,
So oft I would restore death wounded men,
That where I lived, Gallon should not be named,
And he that joined again the scattered limbs
Of torn Hippolitus should be forgotten.
I could teach Ovid courtship, how to win,
A Julia, and enjoy her, though her dower
Were all the Sun gives light to: and for arms
Were the Persian host that drank up Rivers, added
To the Turks present powers, I could direct,
Command, and marshall them.
And yet you know not
To rule your self, you would not to a boy else
Like Plautus Braggart boast thus.
All I speak,
In act I can make good,
Why then being Master,
Of such and so good parts doe you destroy them,
With self opinion or like a rich miser,
Hoard up the treasures you possess, imparting,
Nor to your self nor others, the use of them?
They are to you, but like enchanted viands,
On which you seem to feed, yet pine with hunger;
And those so rare perfections in my son
Which would make others happy, renders me
A wretched Mother.
You are too insolent.
And those too many excellencies, that feed
Your pride, turn to a pleurisy, and kill
That which should nourish virtue; dare you think
All blessings are conferd on you alone.
Ya're grossly consent; there's no good in you,
Which others have not: are you a Scholar? so
Are many, and as knowing: are you valiant?
Waste not that courage then in brawls, but spend it
In the wars, in service of your King and Country.
Yes, so I might be general, no man lives,
That's worthy to command me
Sir, in Lisborne
I am: and you shall know it; every hour
I am troubled with complaints of your behaviour
From men of all conditions, and all sexes.
And my authority, which you presume
Will bear you out, in that you are my Nephew,
No longer shall protect you, for I vow
Though all that's past I pardon, I will punish
The next fault with as much severity
As if you were a stranger, rest assured on it.
And by that love you should bear, or that duty
You owe a Mother, once more I command you
To cast this hautinesse off; which if you doe,
All that is mine, is yours, if not, expect
My prayers, and vows, for your conversion only,
But never means nor favour. 
I am tutored
As I if I were a child still, the base peasants
That fear, and envy my great worth, have done this;
But I will find them out, I will aboard
Yet my disguise, I have too long been idle
Nor will I curb my spirit, I was born free,
And will pursue the course best likes me. 
Divide the spoil amongst you, this fair captive
I only challenge for my self.
You have won her
And well deserve her: twenty years I have lived
A Burgess of the Sea, and have been present
At many a desperate fight, but never saw
So small a bark with such incredible valour
So long defended, and against such odds,
And by two men scarce armed too.
It was a wonder.
And yet the courage they expressed being taken
And the contempt of death wan more upon me
Then all they did, when they were free: me-thinkes
I see them yet when they were brought aboard us,
Disarmed and ready to be put in fetters
How on the sudden, as if they had sworn,
Never to taste the bread of servitude,
Both snatching up their swords, and from this Virgin,
Taking a farewell only with their eyes,
They leapt into the Sea.
Indeed it was rare.
It wrought so much on me, that but I feared,
The great ship that pursued us, our own safety
Hindering my charitable purpose to 'em,
I would have took 'em up, and with their lives
They should have had their liberties.
O too late
For they are lost, for ever lost
Take comfort
It is not impossible, but that they live yet,
For when they left the ships they were within
A league of the shore, and with such strength and cunning
They swimming, did delude the rising billows,
With one hand making way, and with the other,
Their bloody swords advancst, threatening the Sea-gods
With war, unless they brought them safely off,
That I am almost confident they live
And you again may see them.
In that hope
I brook a wretched being, till I am
Made certain of their fortunes, but they dead
Death hath so many doors to let out life,
I will not long survive them.
Hope the best,
And let the courteous usage you have found,
Not usual in men of War persuade you
To tell me your condition.
You know it,
A Captive, my fate and your power have made me,
Such I am now, but what I was it skills not:
For they being dead, in whom I only live
I dare not challenge family, or country
And therefore Sir enquire not, let it suffice,
I am your servant, and a thankful servant,
(If you will call that so, which is but duty)
I ever will be, and my honour safe,
Which nobly hitherto ye have preserved
No slavery can appear in such a form,
Which with a masculine constancy, I will not
Boldly look on and suffer.
You mistake me:
That you are made my prisoner, may prove
The birth of your good fortune. I doe find
A winning language in your tongue and looks;
Nor can a suite by you moved be denied,
And therefore of a prisoner you must be
The Victors advocate
To whom?
A Lady.
In whom all graces that can perfect beauty
Are friendly met, I grant that you are fair:
And had I not seen her before, perhaps
I might have sought to you
This I hear gladly,
To this incomparable Lady I will give you,
(Yet being mine, you are already hers)
And to serve her is more then to be free,
At least I think so: and when you live With her,
If you will please to think on him that brought you
To such a happiness, for so her bounty
Will make you think her service, you shall ever
Make me at your devotion
All I can doe,
Rest you assured of.
At night I'll present you,
Till when I am your guard
Ever your servant. 
To what are we reserved?
Troth tic uncertain,
Drowning we have escaped miraculously, and
Stand fair for ought I know for hanging; money
We have none, nor ere are like to have; it is
To be doubted: besides we are strangers,
Wondrous hungry strangers; and charity
Growing cold, and miracles ceasing,
Without a Conjurers help, cannot find
When we shall eat again.
These are no wants
If put in balance, with Zenocias loss;
In that alone, all miseries are spoken:
O my Rutillio, when I think on her,
And that which she may suffer, being a captive,
Then I could curse my self, almost those powers
That send me from the fury of the Ocean.
You have lost a wife indeed, a fair and chaste one,
Two blessings, not found often in one woman;
But she may be recovered, questionless
The ship that took us was of Portugal
And he in Lisbon, by some means or other
We may hear of her.
In that hope I live.
And so do I, but hope is a poor salad
To dine and sup with, after a two days fast too,
Have you no money left?
Not a Denier,
Nor any thing to pawn? it is now in fashion,
Having a Mistress, sure you should not be
Without a neat historical shirt.
For shame
Talk not so poorly.
I must talk of that
Necessity prompts us to, for beg I cannot,
Nor am I made to creep in at a window,
To filch to feed me, something must be done,
And suddenly resolve on it.
What are these?
One by his habit is a Jew
No more:
Thou art sure that's he.
Most certain.
How long is it
Since first she saw him?
Some two hours. 
Be gone—let me alone to work him.
How he eyes you,
Now he moves, towards us, in the Devils name
What would he with us?
Innocence is bold:
Nor can I fear
That you are poor and strangers,
I easily perceive
But that you'll help us,
Or any of your tribe, we dare not hope Sir.
Why think you so?
Because you are a Jew Sir,
And courtesies come sooner from the Devil
Then any of your Nation.
We are men,
And have like you, compassion when we find
Fit subjects for our bounty, and for proof
That we dare give, and freely, not to you Sir,
Pray spare your pains, there's gold, stand not amazed,
It is current I assure you
Take it man.
Sure thy good Angel is a Jew, and comes
In his own shape to help thee: I could wish now,
Mine would appear so, like a Turk.
I thank you,
But yet must tell you, if this be the prologue
To any bad act, you would have me practice
I must not take it.
This is but the earnest
Of that which is to follow, and the bond
Which you must seal to for it, is your advancement,
Fortune with all that's in her power to give,
Offers her self up to you; entertain her,
And that which Princes have kneeled for in vain
Presents it self to you.
It is above wonder
But far beneath the truth, in my relation
Of what you shall possess, if you embrace it.
There is an hour in each mans life appointed
To make his happiness if then he seize it,
And this, (in which, beyond all expectation,
You are invited to your good) is yours,
If you dare follow me, so, if not, hereafter
Expect not the like offer. 
It is no vision.
It is gold I'm sure. We must like brothers share,
There's for you; by this light I'm glad I have it.
There are few gallants, (for men may be such
And yet want gold, yea and sometimes silver,)
But would receive such favours from the Devil,
Though he appeared like a broker, and demanded
Sixty in the hundred.
Wherefore should I fear,
Some plot upon my life? it is now to me
Not worth the keeping. I will follow him,
Farewell, wish me good fortune, we shall meet
Again I doubt not.
Or I'll ne'er trust Jew more. 
Nor Christian for his sake— plague of my stars,
How long might I have walked without a cloak,
Before I should have met with such a fortune?
We elder Brothers, though we are pro••• men,
Ha not the luck. Have too much beard, th•• spoils us;
The smooth chin carries all? whats here to do now?
I'll take you as I find you:
That were base—you see I am unarmed.
Out with your bodkin
Your pocket dagger, your stiletto, out with it,
Or by this hand i'll kill you: such as you are
Have studied the undoing of poor Cutlers,
And made all manly weapons out of fashion:
You carry Poniards to murder men,
Yet dare not wear a sword to guard your Honour.
that's true indeed: upon my life this gallant
Is bribed to repeal banished swords.
I'll show you
The difference now, between a Spanish rapier
And your pure pisa.
Let me fetch a sword,
Upon mine honour I'll return.
Not so Sir.
Or lend me yours I pray you, and take this,
To be disgraced as you are, no I thank you
Spite of the fashion, while I live, I am
Instructed to go armed: what folly it is
For you that are a man, to put your self
Into your enemies mercy.
Yield it quickly
Or I'll cut off your hand, and now disgrace you,
Thus kick and baffle you: as you like this
You may again prefer complaints against me
To my Uncle and my Mother, and then think
To make it good with a poniard.
I am paid
For being of the fashion.
Get a sword,
Then if you dare, redeem your reputation:
You know I am easily found: Isle add this to it
To put you in mind.
You are too insolent,
And do insult too much on the advantage,
Of that which your unequal weapon gave you,
More then your valour.
This to me you peasant?
Thou art not worthy of my foot poor fellow,
Tic scorn, not pity, makes me give thee life:
Kneel down and thank me for it: how, do you stare?
I have a sword Sir, you shall find, a good one;
This is no stabbing guard.
Were thou thrice armed,
Thus yet I durst attempt thee:
Then have at you,
I scorn to take blows.
O I am slain.
Help! murder, murder!
Shift for your self you are dead else,
You have killed the Governors Nephew.
Raise the streets there.
If once you are beset you cannot scope,
Will you betray your self?
Undone for ever. 
Who makes this out-cry,
O my Lord is murdered;
This way he took, make after him,
Help help there. 
It is Don Duart.
Pride has got a fall
He was still in quarrels, scorned us Peace-makers,
And all our bill-authority, now he's paid for it.
You have met with your match Sir now, bring off his body
And bear it to the Governor. Some pursue
The murderer; yet if he scope, it skills not;
Were I a Prince, I would reward him for it,
He he's rid the City of a turbulent beast,
There's few will pity him: but for his Mother
I truly grieve indeed, shoe's a good Lady. 
Hoe's not in the house,
No madam:
Haste and seek him,
Go all and every where, I'll not to bed
Till you return him, take away the lights too,
The Moon lends me too much, to find my fears,
And those devotions I am to pay
Are written in my heart, not in this book, 
And I shall read them there without a taper, 
I am pursued; all the Ports are stopped too;
Not any hope to escape, behind, before me,
On either side I am beset, cursed fortune
My enemy on the Sea, and on the Land too,
Redeemed from one affliction to another:
Would I had made the greedy waves my tomb
And dyed obscure, and innocent, not as Neroe
Smeared ore with blood. Whither have my fears brought me?
I am got into a house, the doors all open,
This, by the largeness of the room, the hangings,
And other rich adornments, glistering through
The sable masque of night, says it belongs
To one of means and rank: no servant stirring?
Murmur nor whisper?
Who's that?
By the voice,
This is a woman.
Stephano, Jaspe, Julia,
Who waits there?
It is the Lady of the house
I'll fly to her protection.
Speak, what are you?
Of all that ever breathed, a man most wretched.
I am sure you are a man of most ill manners,
You could not with so little reverence else
Press to my private chamber. Whither would you,
Or what do you seek for?
Gracious woman hear me;
I am a stranger, and in that I answer
All your demands, a most unfortunate stranger,
That called unto it by my enemies pride,
Have left him dead it'h streets, Justice pursues me,
And for that life, I took unwillingly,
And in a fair defence, I must lose mine,
Unless you in your charity protect me.
Your house is now my sanctuary, and the Altar,
I gladly would take hold of your sweet mercy.
By all that's dear unto you, by your virtues,
And by your innocence, that needs no forgiveness
Take pity on me.
Are you a Castillian:
No Madam, Italy claims my birth.
I ask not
With purpose to betray you, if you were
Ten thousand times a Spaniard, the nation
We Portuguese most hate, I yet would save you
If it lay in my power: lift up these hangings;
Behind my Beds head theres a hollow place,
Into which enter; so, but from this stir not
If the Officers come, as you expect they will doe,
I know they owe such reverence to my lodgings
That they will easily give credit to me
And search no further.
The blessed Saints pay for me
The infinite debt I owe you.
How he quakes?
Thus far I feel his heart beat, be of comfort,
Once more I give my promise for your safety,
All men are subject to such accidents,
Especially the valiant; and who knows not,
But that the charity I afford this stranger
My only Son else-where may stand in need of?
Now Madam, if your wisdom ever could
Raise up defences against floods of sorrow
That hast to overwhelm you, make true use of
Your great discretion.
Your only son
My Lord Duart's slain.
His murderer, pursued by us
Was by a boy discovered
Entering your house, and that induced us
To press into it for his apprehension.
Oh?
Sure her heart is broke.
Madam.
Stand off,
My sorrow is so dear and precious to me,
That you must not partake it, suffer it
Like wounds that do breed inward to dispatch me.
O my Duart, such an end as this
Thy pride long since did prophecy; thou art dead,
And to increase my misery, thy sad mother?
Must make a wilful shipwreck of her vow
Or thou fall unrevenged. My solo's divided
And piety to a son, and true performance
Of hospitable duties to my guest,
That are to others Angels, are my furies.
Vengeance knocks at my heart, but my word given
Denies the entrance, is no medium left,
But that I must protect the murderer
Or suffer in that faith he made his Altar?
Motherly love give place, the fault made this way,
To keep a vow, to which high heaven is witness,
Heaven may be pleased to pardon.
It is too late
Hoe's gone, past all recovery: now reproof
Were but unseasonable when I should give comfort,
And yet remember Sister.
O forbear,
Search for the murderer, and remove the body,
And as you think fit, give it burial.
Wretch that I am, incapable of all comfort,
And therefore I entreat my friends and kinsfolk,
And you my Lord, for some spare to forbear
Your courteous visitations.
We obey you. 
My spirits come back, and now despair resigns
Her place again to hope.
What ere thou art
To whom I have given means of life, to witness
With what religion I have kept my promise,
Come fearless forth, but let thy face be covered,
That I hereafter be not forced to know thee,
For motherly affection may return
My vow once paid to heaven. Thou hast taken from me,
The respiration of my heart, the light
Of my swollen eyes, in his life that sustained me,
Yet my word given to save you, I make good,
Because what you did, was not done with malice,
You are not known, there is no mark about you
That can discover you; let not fear betray you.
With all convenient speed you can, fly from me
That I may never see you; and that want
Of means may be no let unto your journey,
There are a hundred Crowns: you are at the door now,
And so farewell for ever.
Let me first fall
Before your feet, and on them pay the duty
I owe your goodness; next all blessings to you,
And heaven restore the joys I have bereft you,
With full increase hereafter, living be
The Goddess styled of Hospitality.
Fling off these sullen clouds, you are entered now
Into a house of joy and happiness,
I have prepared a blessing for ye.
Thank ye
You are peevish
And know not whē ye are freinded, I have used those means
My state would rather ask a curse,
The Lady of this house, the noble Lady,
Will take ye as her own, and use ye graciously:
Make much of what you are, Mistress of that beauty,
And expose it not to such betraying sorrows:
When ye are old, and all those sweets hang witherd,
Then sit and sight
My Autum is not far off,
Have you told your Lady
Yes Sir, I have told her
Both of your noble service, and your present,
Which she accepts,
I should be blessed to see her.
That now you cannot doe: she keeps her Chamber
Not well disposed; and has denied all visits,
The maid I have in charge to receive from ye,
So please you render her.
With all my service,
But fine I would have seen,
It is but your patience;
No doubt she cannot but remember nobely.
These three years I have loved this scornful Lady,
And followed her with all the truth of service,
In all which time, but twice she has honoured me
With sight of her blessed beauty: when you please Sir,
You may receive your charge, and tell your Lady;
A Gentleman whose life is only dedicated,
To her commands, kisses her beauteous hands;
And Faire-one, now your help, you may remember
The honest courtesies, since you are mine
I ever did your modesty: you shall be near her,
And if sometimes you name my service to her
And tell her with what nobleness I love her,
Twill be a gratitude I shall remember.
What in my poor power lies, so it be honest.
I ask no more.
You must along with me (Fair)
And so I leave you two: but to a fortune
Too happy for my fate: you shall enjoy her.
Be quick, be quick, Out with the bucket there,
These scents are dull; cast richer on, and fuller;
Sent every place, where have you placed the music?
Here they stand ready Sir.
It is well, be sure
The wines be lusty, high, and full of spirit,
And Amberd all.
They are
Give fair attendance.
In the best trim, and state, make ready all. 
I shall come presently again.
We shall Sir,
What preparation's this?
Some new devise
My Lady has in hand,
ô, prosper it
As long as it carries good wine in the mouth?
And good meat with it, where are all the rest
They are ready to attend.
Sure some great person, 
They would not make this hurry else.
Hark the Music.
It will appear now certain, here it comes.
Now to our places.
Whether will he lead me?
What invitations this? to what new end,
Are these fair preparations? a rich Banquet,
Music, and every place stuck with adornment,
Fit for a Princes welcome; what new game
Has Fortune now prepared to show me happy?
And then again to sink me? it is no illusion.
Mine eyes are not deceived, all these are real;
What wealth and State?
Will you sit down and eat Sir?
These carry little wonder, they are usual;
But you shall see, if you be wise to observe it,
That that will strike indeed: strike with amazement,
Then if you be a man: this fair health to you.
What shall I see? I pledge ye Sir, I was never
So buried in amazement—
You are so still
Drink freely.
The very wines are admirable:
Good Sir, give me leave to ask this question,
For what great worthy man, are these prepared?
And why do you bring me hither?
They are for you, Sir;
And under-vallve not the worth you carry,
You are that worthy man: think well of these.
They shall be more, and greater.
Well, blind fortune
Thou hast the prettiest changes when thou art pleased,
To play thy game out wantonly—
Come be lusty
And awake your Spirits. 
Good Sir, do not wake me.
For willingly I would dye in this dream, pray whose Servants
Are all these that attend her?
They are yours;
They wait on you,
I never yet remember
I kept such faces, nor that I was ever able
To maintain so many.
Now you are, and shall be,
You'll say this house is mine too?
Say it? swear it.
And all this wealth?
This is the least you see Sir.
Why, where has this been hid these thirty years?
For certainly I never found I was wealthy
Till this hour, never dreamed of house, and Servants,
I had thought I had been a younger brother, a poor Gent.
I may eat boldly then.
It is prepared for ye.
The taste is perfect, and most delicate:
But why for me? give me some wine, I do drink;
I feel it sensibly, and I am here,
Here in this glorious place: I am bravely used too,
Good Gentle Sir, give me leave to think a little
For either I am much abused—
Strike Music
And sing that lusty Song. 
Bewitching harmony!
Sure I am turned into another Creature.
Happy and blessed, Arnoldo was unfortunate;
Ha? bless mine eyes; what precious piece of nature
To pose the world?
I told you, you would see that,
Would darken these poor preparations;
What think ye now? nay rise not, it is no vision.
Tic more: it is miracle.
You are welcome Sir.
It speaks, and entertains me still more glorious;
She is warm, and this is flesh here: how she stirs me.
Bless me what stars are there?
May I sit near ye?
No, you are too pure an object to behold,
Too excellent to look upon, and live;
I must remove.
She is a woman Sir,
Fie, what faint hart is this
The house of wonder.
Do not you think your self now truly happy?
You have the abstract of all sweetness by ye,
The precious wealth youth Labours to arrive at
Nor is she less in honour, then in beauty,
Ferraras, royal Duke, is proud to call her
His be•t, his noblest, and most happy Sister,
Fortune has made her Mistress of herself,
Wealthy, and wise, without a power to sway her,
Wonder of Italy, of all harts Mistress.
And all this is—
Hyppolita the beauteous.
You are a poor relator of my fortunes,
Too weak a Chronicle to speak my blessings,
And leave out that essential part of Story
I am most high and happy in, most fortunate,
The acquaintance, and the noble fellowship
Of this fair Gentleman: pray ye do not wonder,
Nor hold it strange to hear a handsome Lady
Speak freely to ye: with your fair leave &amp; curtsy
I will sit by ye.
I know not what to answer,
Nor where I am, nor to what end consider;
Why do you use me thus?
are ye angry Sir,
Because ye are entertained with all humanity?
Freely and nobly used?
No gentle Lady
That were uncivil, but it much amazes me
A stranger, and a man of no desert
Should find such floods of curtsy.
I love ye,
I honour ye, the first and best of all men,
And where that fair opinion leads, it is usual
These trifles that but serve to set off, follow,
I would not have you proud now, nor disdainful
Because I say I love ye, though I swear it,
Nor think it a stale favour I fling on ye,
Though ye be handsome, and the only man
I must confess I ever fixed mine eye on,
And bring along all promises that please us,
Yet I should hate ye then, despise ye, scorn ye,
And with as much contempt pursue your person,
As now I doe with love. But you are wiser,
At least I think, more master of your fortune,
And so I drink your health.
Hold fast good honesty,
I am a lost man else.
Now you may kiss me,
It is the first kiss, I ever ask, I swear to ye.
That I dare doe sweet Lady.
You doe it well too;
You are a Master Sir, that makes you coy.
Would you would send your people off.
Well thought on.
Wait all without. 
I hope she is pleased thoroughly.
Why stand ye still? her'es no man to detect ye,
My people are gon off: come, come, leave conjuring
The Spirit you would raise, is here already
Look boldly on me.
What would you have me doe?
O most unmanly question! have you do?
Is it possible your years should want a Tutor?
I'll teach ye: come, embrace me.
Fie stand off;
And give me leave, more now, then ere, to wonder,
A building of so goodly a proportion,
Outwardly all exact, the frame of Heaven,
Should hide within so base Inhabitants?
You are as fair, as if the morning bare ye,
Imagination never made a sweeter;
Can it be possible this frame should suffer,
And built on slight affections, fright the vewer?
Be excellent in all, as you are outward,
The worthy Mistress of those many blessings
Heaven has bestowed, make 'em appear still nobler,
Because they are trusted to a weaker keeper.
Would ye have me love ye?
Yes,
Not for your beauty;
Though I confess, it blows the first fire in us,
Time as he passes by, puts out that sparkle,
Nor for your wealth, although the world kneel to it,
And make it all addition to a woman,
Fortune that ruins all, makes that his conquest;
Be honest, and be virtuous, i'll admire ye,
At least be wise, and where ye lay these nets,
Strew over 'em a little modesty,
Twill well become your cause, and catch more Fools.
Could any one that loved this wholesome counsel
But love the giver more? you make me fonder:
You have a virtuous mind, I want that ornament;
Is it a sin I covet to enjoy ye?
If ye imagine I am too free a Lover,
And act that part belongs to you I am silent;
Mine eyes shall speak my blushes, parley with ye,
I will not touch your hand, but with a tremble
Fitting a vestal Nun; not long to kiss ye,
But gently as the air, and undiscerned too,
I'll steal it thus: I'll walk your shadow by ye,
So still and silent that it shall be equal,
To put me off, as that, and when I covet,
To give such toys as these —
A new temptation—
Thus like the lazy minutes will I drop 'em,
Which past once are forgotten.
Excellent vice!
Will ye be won? look steadfastly upon me,
Look manly, take a mans affections to you;
Young women, in the old world were not wont, Sir,
To hang out gaudy bushes for their beauties,
To talk themselves into young-mens affections;
How cold and dull you are?
How I stagger?
She is wise, as fair; but it is a wicked wisdom;
I'll choke before I yield.
who waits within there
Make ready the greene chamber,
It shall be Madam.
I am afraid she will enjoy me indeed,
What Music do ye love?
A modest tongue.
We'll have enough of that: fie, fie, how lumpish?
In a young Ladies arms, thus dull?
For heaven sake
Profess a little goodness.
Of what Country?
I am of Rome.
Nay then I know you mock me,
The Italians are not frighted with such bug-bears,
Prithee go in.
I am not well;
I'll make thee,
I'll kiss thee well:
I am not sick of that sore.
upon my conscience, I must ravish thee,
I shall be famous for the first example:
With this I'll tie ye first, then try your strength Sir,
My strength, away base woman? I abhor thee.
I am not caught with stales, disease dwell with thee. 
Are ye so quick? and have I lost my wishes?
Hoe, Zabulon; my Servants.
Called ye Madam?
Is all that beauty scorned, so many sud for?
So many Princes? by a stranger too?
Must I endure this?
Wher's the Gentleman?
Go presently, pursue the stranger, Zabulon.
He has broke from me, Jewels I have given him:
Charge him with theft: hee has stolen my love, my free∣dome,
Draw him before the Governor, imprison him,
Why dost thou stay?
I'll teach him a new dance,
For playing fast and loose with such a Lady.
Come fellows, come: I'll execute your anger,
And to the full.
His scorn shall feel my vengeance.— 
Shall I never see a lusty man again?
Faith Mistress
You do so over-labour 'em when you have 'em,
And so dry-founder 'em, they cannot last.
Wher's the French-man?
Alas, he's all to fitters,
And lies, taking the height of his fortune with a Sirreng.
Hoe's chained, he's chained good man, he is a mourner.
What's become of the Dane?
Who? goldy-locks?
Hoe's foul in the touch-hole; and recoils again,
The main Spring's weakened that holds up his cock,
He lies at the sign of the Sun, to be new breached.
The Rutter too, is gone.
O that was a brave rascal,
He would labour like a thresher: but alas
What thing can ever last? he has been ill mewed,
And drawn too soon; I have seen him in the Hospital.
There was an English-man.
I there was an English-man;
You'll scant find any now, to make that name good.
There was those English that were men indeed,
And would perform like men, but now they are vanished:
They are so taken up in their own Country,
And so beaten off their speed, by their own women,
When they come here, they draw their legs like hackneys:
Drink, and their own devices has undone 'em.
I must have one that's strong, no life in Lisbon else,
Perfect and young: my custom with young Ladies,
And high-fed City dames, will fall, and break else.
I want my self too, in mine age to nourish me:
They are are all sunk I maintained: now what's this busi∣ness.
What goodly fellow's that?
Why do you drag me?
Pox ô your Justice; let me loose.
Not so Sir.
Cannot a man fall into one of your drunken Cel∣lers,
And venture the breaking on's neck, your trap-dores open
But he must be used thus rascally?
What made you wandering
So late in the night? you know that is imprisonment.
May be I walk in my sleep.
May be we'll walk ye.
What made ye wandering Sir, into that vault
Where all the City store, and the Munition lay?
I fell into it by chance, I broke my shins for it.
Your Worships feel not that: I knocked my head
Against a hundred posts, would you had had it.
Cannot I break my neck in mine own defence?
This will not serve: you cannot put it off so,
Your coming thither was to play the villain,
To fire the powder, to blow that part of the City.
Yes, with my nose: why were the trap-doors open?
Might not you fall, or you? had you gone that way?
I thought your City had sunk.
You did your best Sir,
We must presume to help it into'th air.
If you call that sinking: we have told you what's the law,
He that is taken there, unless a Magistrate,
And have command in that place, presently
If there be nothing found apparent, near him
Worthy his torture, or his present death,
Must either pay his fine for his presumption,
(Which is six hundred Ducats) or for six years
Tug at an Oar in the Galleys: will ye walk Sir,
For we presume you cannot pay the penalty.
Row in the Galleys, after all this mischief?
May be you were drunk, they'll keep you sober there.
Tug at an Oar? you are not arrant rascals,
To catch me in a pit-fall, and betray me,
A lusty minded man.
A wondrous able.
Pray Gentlemen, allow me but that liberty
To speak a few words with your prisoner
And I shall thank you.
Take your pleasure, Lady.
What would you give that woman should redeem ye,
Redeem ye from this slavery?
Besides my service
I would give her my whole self, I would be her vassal.
She has reason to expect as much, considering
The great sum she pays for it, yet take comfort
What ye shall doe to merit this, is easy
And I will be the woman shall befriend ye,
It is but to entertain some handsome Ladies,
And young fair Gentlewomen: you guess the way:
But giving of your mind—
I am excellent at it:
You cannot pick out such another living.
I understand ye: is it not thus?
Ye have it.
Bring me a hundred of em: I'll dispatch 'em,
I will be none but yours: should another offer
Another way to redeem me, I should scorn it.
What women you shall please: I am monstrous lusty:
Not to be taken down: would you have Children?
I'll get you those as fast, and thick as flie-blows.
I admire him: wonder at him.
Hark ye Lady,
You may require sometimes—
I by my faith.
And you shall have it by my faith, &amp; handsomely:
This old Cat will suck shrewdly: you have no daughters?
I fly at all: now am I in my Kingdom,
Tug at an Oar? no, tug in a feather-bed,
With good warm Candles; hang your bread and water,
I'll make you young again, believe that Lady.
I will so frubbish you.
Come, follow Officers,
This Gentleman is free: I'll pay the Ducats.
And when you catch me in your City-powdring-tub
Again, boil me with Cabbage.
You are both warned and armed Sir. 
Will your Ladyship wear this dressing?
Leave thy prating:
I care not what I wear.
Yet it is my duty
To know your pleasure, and my worst affection
To see you discontented.
Weeping too?
Prithee forgive me: I am much distempered,
And speak I know not what: to make thee amends
The gown that I wore yesterday, is thine;
Let it alone a while.
Now you perceive,
And taste her bounty.
Much above my merit.
But have you not yet found a happy time
To move for me.
I have watched all occasions,
But hitherto, without success: yet doubt not
But I'll embrace the first means.
Do, and prosper;
Excellent creature, whose perfections make
Even sorrow lovely, if your frowns thus take me
What would your smiles doe?
Pox ô this stale Courtship:
If I have any power.
I am commanded,
Obedience is the Lovers sacrifice
Which I pay gladly.
To be forced to woo,
Being a woman, could not but torment me,
But bringing for my Advocates, youth and beauty,
Set off with wealth: and then to be denied too
Do's comprehend all tortures. They flatterd me,
That said my looks were charms, my touches fetters,
My locks soft chains, to bind the arms of Princes,
And make them in that wished for bondage, happy,
I am like others of a courser feature,
As weak to allure, but in my dotage, stronger:
I am no Circa; he, more then Ʋlysses,
Scorns all my offered bounties, slights my favours,
And, as I were some new Egyptian, flies me,
Leaving no pawn, but my own shame behind him.
But he shall find, that in my fell revenge,
I am a woman: one that never pardons
The rude contemner of her proffered sweetness.
Madam, it is done;
What's done?
The uncivil stranger
Is at your suite arrested.
It is well handled.
And under guard sent to the Governor,
With whom my testimony, and the favour,
He bears your Ladyship, have so prevailed
That he is sentenced.
How?
To loose his head.
Is that the means to quench the scorching heate
Of my enraged desires? must innocence suffer,
Because I am faulty? or is my Love so fatal
That of necessity it must destroy
The object it most longs for? dull Hypollita,
To think that injuries could make way for love,
When courtesies were despised: that by his death
Thou should give that, which only thou can hope for
While he is living: My honours at the stake now,
And cannot be preserved, unless he perish
The enjoying of the thing I love, I ever
Have prized above my fame: why doubt I now then?
One only way is left me, to redeem all:
Make ready my Caroch.
What will you Madam.
And yet I am impatient of such stay:
Bind up my hair: fie, fie, while that is doing
The Law may cease his life: thus, as I am then,
Not like Hypollita, but a Bachanall
My frantic Love transports me. 
Sure shoe's distracted.
Pray you follow her: I will along with you:
I more then guess the cause: women that love
Are most uncertain, and one minute crave,
What, in another they refuse to have. 
Assure thy self Charino, I am altered
From what I was; the tempests we have met with
In our uncertain voyage, were smooth gales
Compared to those, the memory of my lusts
Raised in my conscience: and if ere again
I live to see Zenocia, I will sue,
And seeek to her as a Lover, and a Servant,
And not command affection, like a Tyrant.
In hearing this; you make me young again,
And heaven, it seems, favouring this good change in you
In setting of a period to our dangers
Gives us fair hopes, to find that here in Lisbon
Which hitherto in vain we long have sought for.
I have received assured intelligence;
Such strangers have bin seen here: and though yet
I cannot learn their fortunes, nor the place
Of their abode, I have a soul presages
A fortunate event here.
There have passed
A mutual interchange of courtesies
Between me, and the Governor; therefore boldly
We may presume of him, and of his power
If we find cause to use them, otherwise
I Would not be known here, and these disguises
Will keep us from discovery.
What are these?
The Governor: with him my Rival, bound.
For certain it is Arnoldo.
Let's attend
What the success will be.
Is it possible
There should be hope of his recovery,
His wounds so many and so deadly?
So they appeared at first, but the blood stopped,
His trance forsook him, and on better search
We found they were not mortal;
Use all care
To perfect this unhoped for cure: that done
Propose your own rewards; and till you shall
Hear farther from me, for some ends I have,
Concealed it from his Mother.
We'll not fail Sir. 
You still stand confident on your innocence.
It is my best and last guard, which I will not
Leave, to rely on your uncertain mercy.
Who bade you follow me! Go home, &amp; you Sir,
As you respect me, go with her.
Zenocia?
And in her house a Servant?
It is my daughter.
My love? Contain your joy, observe the sequel. 
Fie Madam, how indecent it is for you.
So far, unlike your self to bee seen thus
In th'open streets? why do you kneel? pray you rise,
I am acquainted with the wrong, and loss
You have sustained, and the Delinquent now
Stands ready for his punishment.
Let it fall Sir,
On the offender: he is innocent
And most unworthy of these bonds he wears,
But I made up of guilt.
What strange turne's this?
This was my prisoner once.
If chastity
In a young man, and tempted to the height too
Did ere deserve reward, or admiration,
He justly may claim both. Love to his person
(Or if you please give it a fowler name)
Compelled me first to train him to my house,
All engines I raised there to shake his virtue,
Which in the assault were useless; he unmoved still
As if he had no part of humane frailty,
Against the nature of my Sex, almost
I plaid the Ravisher. You might have seen
In our contention, young Apollo fly
And love-sicke Daphne follow, all arts failing,
By flight he wan the victory, breaking from
My scorned embraces: the repulse (in women
Unsufferable) invited me to practise
A means to be revenged: and from this grew
His Accusation, and the abuse
Of your still equal justice: My rage ever
Thanks heaven, though wanton, I found not my self
So far engaged to hell, to prosecute
To the death what I had plotted, for that love
That made me first desire him, then accuse him,
Commands me with the hazard of my self
First to entreat his pardon, then acquit him.
What ere you are, so much I love your virtue
That I desire your friendship: doe you unloose him
From those bonds, you are worthy of, your repentance
Makes part of satisfaction; yet I must
Severely reprehend you.
I am made
A stale on all parts: But this fellow shall
Pay dearly for her favour.
My life's so full
Of various changes, that I now despair
Of any certain port; one trouble ending,
A new, and worse succeeds it: what should Zenocia
Doe in this women's house? Can chastity
And hot Lust dwell together without infection?
I would not be or jealous, or secure,
Yet something must be done, to sound the depth on it:
That she lives is my bliss, but living there,
A hell of torments; there's no way to her
In whom I live, but by this door, through which
To me, it is death to enter, yet I must,
And will make trial.
Let me hear no more
Of these devices, Lady: this I pardon,
And at your intercession I forgive
Your instrument the Jew too: get you home.
The hundred thousand crowns you lent the City
Towards the setting forth of the last Navy
Bound for the Islands, was a good then, which
I balance with your ill now.
Now Sir, to him,
You know my daughter needs it.
Let me take
A farewell with mine ey, Sir, though my lip,
Be barred the Ceremony, curtsy
And custom too allows of.
Gentle Madam,
I neither am so cold, nor so ill bred
But that I dare receive it: you are unguarded,
And let me tell you that I am ashamed
Of my late rudeness, and would gladly therefore
If you please to accept my ready service
Waite on you to your house.
Above my hope:
Sir, if an Angel were to be my convoy
He should not be more welcome.— 
Now you know me.
Yes Sir, and honour you: ever remembering
Your many bounties, being ambitious only
To give you cause to say by some one service
That I am not ungrateful.
It is now offered:
I have a suite to you, and an easy one,
Which ever long you shall know.
When you think fit Sir,
And then as a command; I will receive it,
Till when, most welcome: you are welcome too Sir,
It is spoken from the heart, and therefore needs not
Much protestation: at your better leisure
I will enquire the cause that brought you hither:
In the mean time serve you.
You out-doe me Sir. 
You have bestowed on me a second life
For which I live your creature, and have bettered
What nature framed imperfect, my first being
Insolent pride made monstrous; but this later
In learning me to know my self, hath taught me
Not to wrong others.
Then we live indeed.
When we can go to rest without a larum
Given every minute to a guilt-sick conscience
To keep us waking, and rise in the morning
Secure in being innocent: but when
In the remembrance of our worser actions
We ever bear about us whips and furies,
To make the day a night of sorrow to us,
Even life's a burden.
I have found and felt it;
But will endeavour having first made peace
With those intestine enemies my rude passions
To be so with man-kinde: but worthy Doctor,
Pray if you can resolve me; was the Gentleman
That left me dead, ere brought unto his trial?
Nor known, nor apprehended.
Thats my grief.
Why doe you wish he had been punished?
No,
The stream of my swollen sorrow runs not that way:
For could I find him, as I vow to heaven
It shall be my first care to seek him out,
I would with thanks acknowledge that his sword,
In opening my veins, which proud blood poisoned,
Gave the first symptoms of true health.
It is in you
A Christian resolution: that you live
Is by the Governors, your Uncles charge
As yet concealed. And though a sons loss never
Was solemnised with more tears of true sorrow
Then have been paid by your unequald Mother
For your supposed death, shoe's not acquainted
With your recovery.
For some few days
Pray let her so continue: thus disguised
I may abroad unknown.
Without suspicion
Of being discovered
I am confident
No moisture sooner dies then women's tears,
And therefore though I know my Mother virtuous,
Yet being one of that frail sex I purpose
Her farther trial.
That as you think fit—I'll not betray you
To find out this stranger
This true Physician of my mind and manners
Were such a blessing. He seemed poor, and may
Perhaps be now in want; would I could find him.
The Innes I'll search first, then the public Stews
He was of Italy, and that Country breeds not
Precisians that way, but hot Libertines;
And such the most are: it is but a little travail:
I am unfurnished too, pray Mr. Doctor,
Can you supply me?
With what sum you please.
I will not be long absent.
That I wish too;
For till you have more strength, I would not have you
To be too bold.
Fear not, I will be careful. 
I have brought him Sir, a fellow that will do it
Though Hell stood in his way, ever provided
You pay him for it.
He had a strange aspect
And looks much like the figure of a hang-man
In a table of the Passion.
He transcends,
All presidents believe it, a fleshed ruffian,
That hath so often taken the Strappado,
That it is to him, but as a lofty trick
Is to a tumbler: he hath perused too,
All Dungeons in Portugal, thrice seven years
Rowed in the Galleys for three several murders,
Though I presume that he has done a hundred,
And escaped unpunished.
He is much indebt to you,
You set him off so well. What will you take Sir
To beat a fellow for me, that thus wronged me?
To beat him say you?
Yea, beat him to lameness,
To cut his lips or nose off; any thing,
That may disfigure him.
Let me consider?
Five hundred pistollets for such a service
I think were no dear pennyworth.
Five hundred!
Why there are of your brother-hood in the City,
Isle undertake shall kill a man for twenty.
Kill him? I think so; Isle kill any man
For half the money.
And will you ask more
For a sound beating then a murder?
I Sir,
And with good reason, for a dog that's dead
The Spanish proverb says, will never bite:
But should I beat or hurt him only, he may
Recover, and kill me.
A good conclu•ion,
The obduracy of this rascal makes me tender.
I'll run some other course, there's your reward,
Without the employment.
For that as you please Sir;
When you have need to kill a man, pray use me,
But I am out at beating. 
What's to be done then?
I'll tell thee Zabulon, and make thee privy
To my most near designs: this stranger, which
Hyppolita so dotes on, was my prisoner
When the last Virgin, I bestowed upon her,
Was made my prize? how he escaped, hereafter
J'le let thee know; and it may be the love
He bears the servant, makes him scorn the Mistress.
It is not unlike; for the first time he saw her
His looks expressed so much, and for more proof
Since he came to my Ladies house, though yet
He never knew her, he hath practi•'d with me
To help him to a conference, without
The knowledge of Hyppolita; which I promised.
And by all means perform it, for their meeting,
But work it so, that my disdainful Mistress
(Whom, notwithstanding all he• injuries
It is my hard fate to love) may see and hear them.
To what end Sir?
This Zabulon: when she sees
Who is her rival, and her Lovers baseness
To leave a Princess for her bondwoman,
The sight make her scorn, what now she dotes on,
I'll double thy reward.
You are like to speed then:
For I confess what you will soon believe,
We serve them best that are most apt to give.
For you I'll place you where you shall see all, and yet be unobserved.
Tat I desire too. 
I cannot see her yet, how it afflicts me:
The poison of this place, should mix it self
With her pure thoughts? It was she that was commanded
Or my eyes failed me grossly; that youth, that face
And all that noble sweetness. May she not live here,
And yet be honest still?
It is Arnoldo,
From all his dangers free; fortune I bless thee,
My noble husband! how my joy swells in me,
But why in this place? what business hath he here?
He cannot hear of me, I am not known here.
I left him virtuous; how I shake to think now?
And how that joy I had, cools, and forsakes me?
This Lady is but fair, I have been thought so
Without compare admired; She has bewitched him
And he forgot—
It is she again, the same—the same Zenocia.
There they are together. — Now you may mark
Peace let 'em parley.
That you are well Zenocia; and once more,
Bless my despairing eyes, with your wished presence,
I thank the gods; but that I meet you here—
They are acquainted,
I found that secret Madam,
When you commanded her go home: pray hear 'em.
That you meet me here, ne'er blush at that Arnoldo.
Your coming comes too late: I am a woman,
And one woman with another may be trusted;
Do you fear the house?
More then a fear, I know•t,
Know it not good, not honest.
What do you here then?
In the name of virtue why doe you approach it?
Will you confess the doubt and yet pursue it?
Where have your eyes been wandering my Arnoldo?
What constancy, what faith do you call this? Fie,
Aim at one wanton mark, and wound another?
I doe confess, the Lady fair, most beauteous, 
And able to betray a strong mans liberty,
But you that have a love, a wife—you do well
To deal thus wisely with me: yet Arnoldo,
Since you are pleased to study a new beauty,
And think this old and ill, beaten with misery.
Study a nobler way for shame to love me,
Wrong not her honesty.
You have confirmed me.
Who though she be your wife, will never hinder you,
So much I rest a servant to your wishes,
And love your Loves, though they be my destructions,
No man shall know me, nor the share I have in thee,
No eye suspect, I am able to prevent you,
For since I am a slave to this great Lady,
Whom I perceive you follow
Be not blinded.
Fortune shall make me useful to your service,
I will speak for you.
Speak for me? you wrong me.
I will endeavour all the ways I am able
To make her think well of you; will that please,
To make her dote upon you, dote to madness,
So far against my self I will obey you.
But when that's done, and I have showed this duty
This great obedience, few will buy it at my price,
Thus will I shake hands with you, wish you well,
But never see you more, nor receive comfort
From any thing, Arnoldo.
You are too tender;
I neither doubt you, nor desire longer
To be a man, and live, then I am honest
And only yours; our infinite affections
Abused us both.
Where are your favours now?
The courtesies you showed this stranger, Madam?
Have I now found the cause?
Attend it further.
Did she invite you doe you say?
Most cunningly,
And with a preparation of that state
I was brought in and welcomed.
Seemed to love you?
Most infinitely, at first sight, most dotingly.
She is a goodly Lady;
Wondrous handsome:
At first view, being taken unprepared,
Your memory, not present then to assist me,
She seemed so glorious sweet, and so far stirred me,
Nay be not jealous, there's no harm done.
Prithee—did thou not kiss Arnoldo?
Yes faith did I.
And then—
I durst not, did not—
I forgive you,
Come tell the truth.
May be I lay with her.
He mocks me too, most basely.
Did ye faith? did ye forget so far?
Come, come, no weeping;
I would have lain first in my grave, believe that.
Why will you ask those things you would not hear?
She is too intemperate to betray my virtues
Too openly lascivious: had she dealt
But with that seeming modesty she might,
And flung a little Art upon her ardor,
But it was forgot, and I forgot to like her,
And glad I was deceived. No my Zenocia,
My first love here begun, rests here unreapt yet,
And here for ever.
You have made me happy,
Even in the midst of bondage blessed.
You see now
What rubs are in your way.
And quickly Zabulon
I'll root 'em out.—Be sure you do this presently.
Doe not you alter then.
I am resolute. 
To see you only I came hither last,
Drawn by no love of hers, nor base allurements,
For by this holy light I hate her heartily.
I am glad of that you have saved me so much vengeance
And so much fear
From this hour, fair befall you.
Some means I shall make shortly to redeem you,
Till when, observe her well, and fit her temper,
Only her lust contemn.
When shall I see you?
I will live here abouts, and bear her fair still,
Till I can find a fit hour to redeem you.
Shut all the doors;
Who's that?
We are betrayed,
The Lady of the house has heard our parley,
Seen us, and seen our Loves.
You courteous Gallant,
You that scorn all I can bestow, that laugh at
The afflictions, and the groans I suffer for you,
That slight and jeer my love, contemn the fortune,
My favours can fling on you, have I caught you?
Have I now found the cause? ye fool my wishes?
Is mine own slave, my bane? I nourish that
That sucks up my content. I'll pray, no more,
Nor woo no more; thou shalt see foolish man,
And to thy bitter pain and anguish, look on
The vengeance I shall take, provoked and slighted;
Redeem her then, and steal her hence: ho Zabulon
Now to your work.
Lady, but hear me speak first,
As you have pity.
I have none. You taught me,
When I even hung about your neck, you scorned me.
Shall we pluck yet?
No, hold a little Zabulon,
I'll pluck his heart-strings first: now am I worthy
A little of your love?
I'll be your servant,
Command me through what danger you shall aim at,
Let it be death.
Be sure Sir, I shall fit you.
But spare this Virgin;
I would spare that villain first,
Had cut my Fathers throat.
Bounteous Lady,
If in your sex there be that noble softness,
That tenderness of heart, women are crowned for—
Kneel not Arnoldo, doe her not that honour,
She is not worthy such submission,
I scorn a life depends upon her pity.
Proud woman do thy worst, and arm thy anger,
With thoughts as black as hell, as hot and bloody,
I bring a patience here, shall make 'em blush,
An innocence, shall outlook thee, and death too.
Make me your slave, I give my freedom to ye,
For ever to be fetterd to your service;
It was I offended, be not so unjust then,
To strike the innocent, this gentle maid,
Never intended fear and doubt against you:
She is your servant, pay not her observance
With cruel looks, her duteous faith with death.
Am I fair now? now am I worth your liking?
Not fair, not to be liked, thou glorious Devil,
Thou varnished piece of lust, thou painted fury.
Speak gently sweet, speak gently;
I'll speak nobly.
It is not the saving of a life I aim at,
Mark me lascivious woman, mark me truly,
And then consider, how I weigh thy angers.
Life is no longer mine, nor dear unto me,
Then useful to his honour, I preserve it
If thou had studied all the courtesies
Humanity and noble blood, are linked too,
Thou could not have propounded such a benefit,
Nor heaped upon me such unlooked for honour
As dying for his sake, to be his Martyr,
It is such a grace.
You shall not want that favour,
Let your bones work miracles.
Dear Lady
By those fair eyes—
There is but this way left ye
To save her life.—
Speak it, and I embrace it.
Come to my private chamber presently
And there, what love and I command—
I'll doe it,
Be comforted Zenocia.
Do not do this,
To save me, do not loose your self I charge you,
I charge you by your love, that love you bear me;
That love, that constant love you have twined to me,
By all your promises, take heed you keep 'em,
Now is your constant trial. If thou dost this,
Or move one foot, to guide thee to her lust,
My curses and eternal hate pursue thee.
Redeem me at the base price of disloyalty?
Must my undoubted honesty be thy bawd too?
Go and entwine thy self about that body?
Tell her, for my life thou hast lost thine honour,
Pulled all thy vows from heaven, basely, most basely
To add an hour to me that hate thee for it,
Stooped to the servile flames of that foul woman
Know thee again, nor name thee for a husband.
What shall I doe to save her?
How now, what hast there?
The Governor, attended with some Gentlemen,
Are newly entered, to speak with your Ladyship.
Pox ô their business, reprieve her for this hour,
I shall have other time.
Now fortune help us.
I'll meet 'em presently: retire a while all. 
You rise to day upon your right side Lady;
You know the danger too, and may prevent it,
And if you suffer her to perish thus,
As she must doe, and suddenly believe it,
Unless you stand her friend; you know the way on it,
I guess you poorly love her, less your fortune.
Let her know nothing, and perform this matter,
There are hours ordained for several businesses,
You understand.
I understand you bawd Sir,
And such a Councellor I never cared for.
Your Lordship does me honour.
Fair Hyppolita,
I am come to ease you of a charge.
I keep none,
I count a burden Sir: and yet I lye too.
Which is the maid; is she here?
Yes Sir,
This is she, this is Zenocia,
The very same I sued to your Lordship for.
Clodio again? more misery? more ruin?
Under what angry star is my life governed.
Come hither maid, you are once more a free wo' man
Here I discharge your bonds.
Another smile,
Another trick of fortune to betray us!
Why do's your Lordship use me so unnobly?
Against my will, to take away my bond-woman?
She was no lawful prize, therefore no bond-wo∣man:
She's of that Country we hold friendship with,
And ever did, and therefore to be used
With entertainment, fair and courteous.
The breach of league in us gives foul example,
Therefore you must be pleased to think this honest;
Did you know what she was?
Not till this instant;
For had I known her, she had been no prisoner.
There, take the maid, she is at her own dispose now,
And if there be ought else to do your honour
Any poor service in—
I am vowed your servant;
Your Father's here too, that's our only comfort,
And in a Country now, we stand free people,
Where Clodio has no power, be comforted.
I fear some trick yet.
Be not so dejected.
You must not be displeased; so farewell Lady.
Come Gentlemen; Captain, you must with me too,
I have a little business.
I attend your Lordship:
Now my way's free, and my hopes. Lords again.
Dy'e jeer me now ye are going?
I may live yet — to make you howl both.
You might have done; you had power then,
But now the chains are off, the command lost,
And such a story they will make of this
To laugh out lazy time.
No means yet left me?
For now I burst with anger: none to satisfy me?
No comfort? no revenge?
You speak too late;
You might have had all these, your useful servants
Had you been wise, and sudden; What power, or will
Over her beauty, have you now? by violence
To constrain his love; she is as free as you are,
And no law can impeach her liberty,
And whilst she is so, Arnoldo will despise you.
Either my love or anger must be satisfied,
Or I must dye.
I have a way wooed do it,
Wooed do it yet, protect me from the Law.
From any thing; thou know what power I have
What money, and what friends.
It is a devilish one:
But such must now be used: walk in, I'll tell you;
And if you like it, if the Devil can doe any thing.
Devil, or what thou wilt, so I be satisfied. 
This is the rarest, and the lustiest fellow,
And so bestirs himself—
Give him breath Mistress
You'll melt him else.
He does perform such wonders—
The women are mad on him.
Give him breath I say;
The man is but a man, he must have breath.
How many had he yesterday?
And they paid bravely too.
About fourteen.
But still I cry give breath, spare him and have him.
Five Dames to day; this was a small stage
He may endure five more.
Breath, breath I cry still;
Body ô me give breath, the man's a lost man else.
Feed him and give him breath. 
Welcome Gentlewomen,
You're very welcome.
We hear you have a lusty &amp; wel-complexion'd fellow
That does rare tricks, my sister and my self here,
Would trifle out an hour or two so, please you.
Jaques, conduct 'em in.
There's for your curtsy. 
Good pay still, good round pay, this happy fellow
Will set me up again; he brings in gold
Faster then I have leisure to receive it.
O that his body were not flesh and fading;
But I'll so pap him up —nothing too dear for him;
What a sweee sent he has?—Now what news Jaques?
He cannot last, I pity the poor man
I suffer for him; two coaches of young City dames,
And they drive as the Devil were in the wheels,
Are ready now to enter: and behind these
An old dead-palsied Lady in a litter,
And she makes all the hast she can: the man's lost,
You may gather up his dry bones to make nine-pins,
But for his flesh.
These are but easy labours,
Yet, for I know he must have rest.
He must:—you'll beat him off his legs else pre∣sently.
Go in, and bid him please himself, I am pleased too:
To morrow's a new day; but if he can
I would have him take pity ô the old Lady.
Alas it is charity.
I'll tell him all this
And if he be not too fool-hardy.
How now?
What news with you?
You must presently
Show all the art you have, and for my Lady.
She may command.
You must not dream nor trifle.
Which way?
A spell you must prepare, a powerful one,
Peruse but these directions, you shall find all;
There is the picture too, be quick, and Faithful,
And do it with that strength—When it is performed
Pitch your reward at what you please, you have it.
Isle do my best, and suddenly: but hark ye,
Will you never lye at home again?
Excuse me,
I have too much business yet.
I am right glad on it.
Think on your business, so farewell.
I'll do it.
Within this hour I'll visit you again
And give you greater lights.
I shall observe ye;
This brings a brave reward, bravely I'll do it
And all the hidden art I have, express in it. 
Now do I look as if I were Crow-trodden,
Fie how my hams shrink under me; ô me,
I am broken-winded too; Is this a life?
Is this the recreation I have aimd at,
I had a body once, a handsome body,
And wholesome too. Now I appear like a rascal
That had been hung a year or two in gibbets.
Fie how I faint; Women? keep me from women;
Place me before a Cannon, it is a pleasure;
Stretch me upon a rac it, a recreation;
But women? women? ô the Devil! women?
Curtius gulf was never half so dangerous.
Is there no way to find the trap-dore again,
And fall into the Cellar, and be taken?
No lucky fortune to direct me that way?
No galleys to be got, nor yet no gallows?
For I fear nothing now, no earthly thing
But these unsatisfied Men-leeches, women.
How devilishly my bones ache: ô the old Lady!
I have a kind of waiting-woman, lies cross my back too,
O how she stings! no treason to deliver me?
Now what are you? do you mock me?
No Sir, no,
We were your Predecessors in this place,
And come to see you bear up.
Good Gentlemen;
You seem to have a snuffing in your head Sir,
A parlous snuffing, but this same dampish air—
A dampish air indeed.
Blow your face tenderly,
Your nose will ne'er endure it: mercy ô me,
What are men change'd to here? is my nose fast yet?
Me thinks it shakes it'h hilts: pray tell me Gentlemen,
How long is it since you flourished here?
Not long since.
Move your self easily, I see you are tender,
Nor long endured.
The labour was so much Sir
And so few to perform it.—
Must I come to this?
And draw my legs after me like a lame dog?
I cannot run away, I am too feeble:
Will you sue for this place again Gentlemen?
No truly sir, the place has been too warm for our com∣plexions.
We have enough on it, rest you merry sir,
We came but to congratulate your fortune,
You have abundance.
Bear your fortune soberly,
And so we leave you to the next fair Lady. 
Stay but a little, and I'll meet you Gentlemen,
At the next Hospital: ther's no living thus,
Nor am I able to endure it longer,
With all the helps and heats that can be given me,
I am at my trot already; they are fair and young
Most of the women that repair unto me,
But they stick on like burs, shake me like feathers.
More women yet?
Would I were honestly married,
To any thing that had but half a face,
And not a groat to keep her, nor a smock,
That I might be civilly merry when I pleased,
Rather then labouring in these fulling mills.
By this the spell begins to work: you are lusty,
I see you bear up bravely yet.
Doe you hear Lady,
Do not make a game-beare of me, to play me hourly,
And fling on all your whelps; it will not hold;
Play me with some discretion; to day one course,
And two days hence another.
If you be so angry
Pay back the money I redeemed you at
And take your course; I can have men enough:
You have lost me an hundred crowns since you came hither,
In broths and strengthening caudles; till you do pay m•
If you will eat and live, you shall endeavour,
I'll chain you to it else.
Make me a dog-ken… 〈…〉
I'll keep your house and bark, 〈◊〉 •eed on bare bones,
And be whipped out a doors,
Doe you mark me Lady? whipped,
I'll eat old shoes. 
In this house, I am told
There is a stranger, of a goodly person,
And such a one there was; if I could see him,
I yet remember him.
Your business Sir,
If it be for a woman, ye are consent,
I keep none here. 
Certain this is the Gentleman,
The very same.
Death, if I had but money,
Or any friend to bring me from this bondage,
I would thrash, set up a Cobblers shop, keep hogs,
And feed with 'em, sell tinder boxes,
And Knights of Ginger-bread, thatch for three
Half pence a day, and think it Lordly,
From this base stallion trade: Why does he cy me,
Eye me so narrowly?
It seems you are troubled Sir,
I heard you speak of want;
It is better hearing
Far, then reliving Sir?
I do not think so, you know me not.
Not yet that I remember.
You shall, and for your friend: I am beholding to ye
Greatly beholding Sir, If you remember,
You fought with such a man, they called Duart,
A proud distempered man: he was my enemy,
My mortal foe, you slew him fairly, nobly.
Speak softly Sir, you do not mean to betray me
I wished the Gallows, now they are coming fairly.
Be confident, for as I live, I love you,
And now you shall perceive it: for that service
Me, and my purse command: there, take it to ye,
It is gold, and no small sum, a thousand ducats,
Supply your want.
But do you do this faithfully?
If I mean ill, spit in my face and kick me,
In what else I may serve you, Sir—
I thank you,
This is as strange to me as Knights adventure.
I have a project, it is an honest one,
And now I'll tempt my fortune.
Trust me with it.
You are so good and honest I must trust ye,
It is but to carry a letter to a Lady
That saved my life once.
That will be most thankful,
I will do it with all care.
Where are you, white-broth?
Now lusty blood,
Come in, and tell your money:
It is ready here, no threats, nor no orations,
Nor prayers now.
You do not mean to leave me—
I'll live in hell sooner then here, and cooler.
Come quickly come, dispatch, this ayers unwholesome:
Quickly good Lady, quickly to it.
Well, since it must be,
The next, I'll fetter faster sure, and closer.
And pick his bones, as you're done mine, pox take ye.
At my lodging for a while, you shall be quarterd,
And there take physic for your health.
I thank ye
I have found my Angel now too, if I can keep him.
You like the Letter.
Yes, but I must tell you,
You tempt a desperate hazard, to solicit
The mother, (and the grieved one too, it is rumord)
Of him you slew so lately.
I have told you
Some proofs of her affection, and I know not
A nearer way to make her satisfaction
For a lost Son, then speedily to help her
To a good husband; one that will beget
Both sons and daughters, if she be not barren.
I have had a breathing now, and have recovered
What I lost in my late service, it was a hot one:
It fired and fired me; but all thanks to you Sir,
You have both freed and cooled me.
What is done Sir
I thought well done, and was in that rewarded,
And therefore spare your thanks.
I'll no more whoring:
This fencing twixt a pair of sheets, more wear• one
Then all the exercise in the world besides.
To be drunk with good Canary, a mere Julep
Or like gourd-water to 't; twenty surfeits
Come short of one nights work there. If I get this Lady
As ten to one I shall; I was ne'er denied yet,
I will live wondrous honestly; walk before her
Gravely, and demurely
And then instruct my family; you are sad,
What do you muse on Sir?
Truth I was thinking
What course to take for the delivery of your letter,
And now I have it: but faith did this Lady
(For do not gull your self) for certain know,
You kilt her son?
Give me a book, I'll swear it;
Denied me to the Officers, that pursued me,
Brought me her self to'th door, then gave me gold
To bear my charges, and shall I make doubt then
But that she loved me? I am confident
Time having tan her grief off, that I shall be
Most welcome to her: for then to have wooed her
Had been unseasonable.
well Sir, there's more money,
To make you handsome; I'll about your business:
You know where you must stay.
There you shall find me:
Would I could meet my brother now, to know,
Whither the Jew, his Genius, or my Christian,
Has proved the better friend. 
O who would trust
Deceiving woman! or believe that one
The best, and most canonised ever was
More then a seeming goodness! I could rail now
Against the sex, and curse it; but the theme
And way's too common: yet that Guiomar
My mother; (nor let that forbid her to be
The wonder of our nation) she that was
Marked out the great example, for all Matrons
Both wife and Widow; she that in my breeding
Expressed the utmost of a mothers care,
And tenderness to a son; she that yet fains
Such sorrow for me; good God, that this mother,
After all this, should give up to a stranger,
The wreak she owed her son; I fear her honour.
That he was saved, much joys me, and grieve only
That she was his preserver. I'll try further,
And by this Engine, find whether the tears,
Of which, she is so prodigal, are for me,
Or used to cloak her base hypocrisy. 
Are you assured the charm prevails?
Do I live?
Or you speak to me? Now, this very instant
Health takes its last leave of her; maugre paleness
Like winter, nips the Roses and the lilies,
The Spring that youth, and love adorned her face with.
To force affection, is beyond our art,
For I have proved all means that hell has taught me,
Or the malice of a woman, which exceeds it,
To change Arnoldoe's love, but to no purpose:
But for your bond-woman.
Let her pine ••d dye;
She removed; which like a brighter sun,
Obscures my beams, I may shine out again,
And as I have been, be admired and sought to:
How long has she to live?
Lady, before
The Sun twice rise and set, be confident,
She is but dead; I know my Charm hath found her
Nor can the Governors guard; her lovers tears;
Her Fathers sorrow, or his power that freed her,
Defend her from it.
All things have succeeded,
As you could wish; I saw her brought sick home;
The image of pale death, stamped on her fore-head.
Let me adore this second Hecate,
This great Commandress, of the fatal sisters,
That as she pleases, can cut short, or lengthen
The thread of life.
Where was she, when the enchantment
First ceased upon her.
Taking the fresh air,
In the company of the Governor, and Count Clodio
Arnoldo too, was present with her Father,
When, in a moment (so the servants told me)
As she was giving thanks to the Governor,
And Clodio, for her unexpected freedom,
As if she had been blasted, she sunk down,
To their amazement.
It is thy master-piece
Which I will so reward, that thou shalt fix here,
And with the hazard of thy life, no more
Make trial of thy powerful Art; which known
Our Laws call death: off with this Magical robe,
And be thy self.
Stand close, you shall hear more.
You must have patience; all rage is vain now,
And piety forbids, that we should question
What is decreed above, or ask a reason
Why heaven determines this or that way of us.
Heaven has no hand in it; it is a work of hell.
Her life hath been so innocent, all her actions
So free from the suspicion of crime,
As rather she deserves a Saints place here,
Then to endure, what now her sweetness suffers.
Not for her fault, but mine Sir; Zenocia suffers,
The sin I made, when I sought to rase down
Arnoldos love, built, on a Rock of truth,
Now to the height is punished. I profess,
Had he no birth, nor parts, the present sorrows
He now expresses for her, does deserve her
Above all Kings, though such had been his rivals.
All Ancient stories, of the love of husbands
To virtuous wives, be now no more remembered.
The tales of Turtles, ever be forgotten,
Or, for his sake believed.
I have heard, there has been
Between some married pairs, such sympathy,
That the husband, has felt really, the throws
His wife then teeming suffers, this true grief,
Confirms, it is not impossible.
Wee shall find
Fit time for this hereafter; lets' use now
All possible means to help her.
Care, nor cost,
Nor what Physicians can do, shall be wanting;
Make use of any means, or men.
You are noble. 
Ten Colleges of Doctors shall not save her.
Her fate is in your hand.
Can I restore her?
If you command my Art.
I'll dye my self first.
And yet I'll go visit her, and see
This miracle of sorrow in Arnoldo:
And it were for me, I should change places with her,
And dye most happy, such a lovers tears,
Were a rich monument, but too good for her;
Whose misery I glory in: come Sulpitia,
You shall a long with me, good Zabulon
Be not far off.
I will attend you Madam. 
I have served you, from my youth, and ever
You have found me faithful: that you lives a treasure
I'll locke up here; nor shall it be let forth,
But when you give me warrant.
I rely,
Upon thy faith; nay, no more protestations,
Too many of them, will call that in question,
Which now I doubt not, she is there.
Alone too
But take it on my life your entertainment,
Appearing as you are, will bee but course
For the displeasure, I shall undergo;
I am prepared.
Leave me, I'll stand the hazard. 
The silence that's observed, her close retirements
No visitance admitted, not the day;
These sable colours, all signs of true sorrow,
Or hers is deeply counterfeit. I'll look nearer,
Manners give leave—she fits upon the ground;
By heaven she weeps; my picture in her hand too;
She kisses it and weeps again.
Whose there?
There is no starting back now Madam.
Ha, another murderer, I'll not protect thee,
Though I have no more Sons.
Your pardon Lady,
Ther's no such foul fact taints me
What makes thou here then?
Where are my Servants, do none but my sorrows
Attend upon me? speak, what brought thee hither?
A will, to give you comfort.
Thou art but a man.
And it is beyond a humane reach to do it
If thou could raise the dead out of their graves.
Bid time run back, make me now what I was,
A happy Mother: gladly I would hear thee,
But that's impossible.
Please you but to read this;
You shall know better there, why I am sent
Then if I should deliver it
From whom comes it?
That will instruct you; I suspect this stranger,
Yet she spake something, that holds such alliance,
With his reports I know not what to think on it;
What a frown was there? she looks me through, &amp; through,
Now reads again, now pauses, and now smiles;
And yet there's more of anger in it then mirth,
These are strange changes; oh I understand it
She's full of serious thoughts.
You are just you Heavens,
And never do forget to hear their prayers,
That truly pay their vows, the deferred vengeance,
For you, and my words sake so long deferred,
Under which as a mountain, my heart groans yet
When it was despaired of, now is offered to me;
And if I loose it, I am both ways guilty,
The women's mask, dissimulation help me;
Come hither friend, I am sure you know the Gentleman,
That sent these charms.
Charms Lady?
These charms.
I well may call them so, you have won upon me,
More then ere letter did; thou art his friend,
(The confidence he has in thee, confirms it)
And therefore I'll be open breasted to thee,
To hear of him, though yet, I never saw him,
Was most desired of all men; let me blush,
And then I'll say I love him.
All men see,
In this a women's virtue.
I expected
For the curtsy I did, long since to have seen him,
And though I then forbad it, you men know,
Between our harts and tongues, there's a large distance;
But I'll excuse him, may be hitherto,
He has forborne it, in respect my Son
Fell by his hand.
And reason Lady.
No, he did me a pleasure in it, a riotous fellow,
And with that insolent, not worth the owning▪
I have indeed kept a long solemn sorrow,
For my friends sake partly; but especially
For his long absence.
O the Devil!
Therefore,
Bid him bee speedy; a Priest shall be ready
To tie the holy knot; this kiss I send him,
Deliver that and bring him.
I am dumb:
A good cause I have now, and a good sword,
And something I shall do, I wait upon you. 
Give her more ayre she dyes else.
O thou dread power,
That made this all, and of thy workmanship,
This virgin wife, the Master peace, look down on her;
Let her minds virtues, clothed in this fair garment,
That worthily deserves, a better name
Then flesh and blood, now sue, and prevail for her.
Or if those are denied, let innocence,
To which, all passages in heaven stand open,
Appear in her white robe, before thy throne;
And mediate for her: or if this age of sin,
Be worthy of a miracle, the Sun
In his diurnal progress never saw,
So sweet a subject to employ it on.
Wonders are ceased Sir, we must work by means,
It is true and such reverend Physicians are;
To you—thus low I fall then; so may you ever
Be styled the hands of heaven, natures restorers;
Get wealth and honours; and by your success,
In all your undertakings, propagate
Your great opinion in the world, as now
You use your saving Art; for know good Gentlemen.
Besides the fame, and all that I possess,
For a reward, posterity shall stand
Indebted to you, for (as heaven forbid it)
Should my Zen•cia dye, robbing this age,
Of all that's good or graceful, times succeeding,
The story of her pure life not yet perfect,
Will suffer in the want of her example.
Were all the world to perish with her, wee
Can do no more; then what art and experience
Gives us assurance of, we have used all means
To find the cause of her disease, yet cannot;
How should we then, promise the cure?
Away,
I did belly you, when I charged you with
The power of doing; ye are mere names only,
And even your best perfection, accidental;
What ever malady thou art, or spirit,
As some hold, all diseases that afflict us,
As love, already makes me sensible
Of half her sufferings, ease her of her part,
And let me stand the butt, of thy fell malice,
And I will swear you are merciful.
Your hand Lady;
What a strange heat is hear? bring some warm water.
She shall use nothing that is yours; my sorrow,
Provides her of a better bath, my tears,
Shall do that office.
O my best Arnoldo!
The truest of all lovers! I would live
Were heaven so pleased, but to reward your sorrow,
With my true service; but since that's denied me,
May you live long and happy: do not suffer,
(By your affection to me I conjure you)
My sickness to infect you; though much love
Makes you too subject to it.
In this only
Zenocia Wrongs her servant; can the body
Subsist, the soul departed? it is as easy
As I to live without you; I am your husband,
And long have been so, though our adverse fortune,
Banding us, from one hazard to another,
Would never grant me so much happiness,
As to pay a husbands debt; despite of fortune,
In death I'll follow you, and guard mine own;
And there enjoy what here my fate forbids me.
So true a sorrow, and so feelingly
Expressed, I never read of.
I am struck
With wonder to behold it, as with pity
If you that are a stranger, suffer for them,
Being tied no further then humanity
Leads you to soft compassion; think great Sir,
What of necessity I must endure,
That am a Father?
Waite me there, I hold it
Unfit to have you seen; as I find cause,
You shall proceed,
You are welcome Lady.
Sir, I come to do a charitable office,
How does the patient?
You may enquire
Of more then one; for two are sick, and deadly,
He languishes in her, her healths, despaird of,
And in hers, his.
It is a strange spectacle,
With what a patience, they sit unmoved?
Are they not dead already?
By her pulse,
She cannot last a day.
Oh by that summons,
I know my time too!
Look to the man.
Apply
Your Art, to save the Lady, preserve her,
A town is your reward.
I'll treble it,
In ready gold, if you restore Arnoldo;
For in his death I dye too.
without her,
I am no more.
Are you there Madam? now
You may feast on my miseries; my coldness
In answering your affections; or hardness,
Give it what name you please, you are revenged of;
For now you may perceive, our thread of life
Was spun together, and the poor Arnoldo,
Made only to enjoy the best Zenocia,
And not to serve the use of any other;
And in that she may equal, my Lord Clodio,
Had long since else enjoyed her, nor could I
Have been so blind, as not to see your great
And many excellencies far, far beyond
Or my deservings, or my hopes; we are now
Going our latest journey, and together,
Our only comfort we desire, pray give it
Your charity to our ashes, such wee must be,
And not to curse our memories.
I am much moved.
I am wholly overcome, all love to women,
Farewell for ever, ere you dye, your pardon;
And yours Sir; had she many years to live,
Perhaps I might look on her, as a Brother,
But as a lover never; and since all
Your sad misfortunes, had original
From the barbarous custom practised in my Country,
Heaven witness, for your sake I here release it;
So to your memory, chaste Wives and Virgins
Shall ever pay their vows. I give her to you;
And wish, she were so now, as when my lust
Forced you; to quite the Country.
It is in vain,
To strive with destiny, here my dotage ends,
Look up Zenocin, health in me speaks to you;
She gives him to you, that by divers ways,
So long has kept him from you: and repent not,
That you were once my servanr, for which health
In recompense of what I made you suffer,
The hundred thousand Crowns, the City owes me,
Shall be your dower.
It is a magnificent gift,
Had it been timely given.
It is believe it; Sulpitia?
Madam
Quick, undo the charm;
Ask not a reason why; let it suffice,
It is my will.
Which I obey and gladly. 
Is to be married say thou?
So she says sir,
And does desire your presence. 
And tell her i'll come.
Pray carry them to their rest; for though already,
They do appear as dead, let my life pay for it,
If they recover not.
What you have warranted,
Assure your self, will be expected from you;
Look to them carefully; and till the trial,
Which shall not be above four hours.
Let me
Entreat your companies: there is something
Of weight, invites me hence.
weell waite upon you. 
You understand what my directions are,
And what they guide you to; the faithful promise,
You have made me all.
We do and will perform it.
The Governor will not fail to be here presently
Retire a while, till you shall find occasion,
And bring me word, when they arrive.
Wee shall Madam.
Only stay you to entertain;
I am ready
I wonder at the bold, and practised malice,
Men ever have a foot, against our honours,
That nothing we can do, never so virtuous,
No shape put on so pious, no not think
What a good is, be that good ne'er so noble,
Never so Laden with admired example,
But still we end in lust; our aims our actions,
Nay, even our charities, with lust are branded;
Why should this stranger else, this wretched stranger,
Whose life I saved at what dear price, stick here yet?
Why should he hope, he was not here an hour,
And certainly in that time, I may swear it
I gave him no loose look, I had no reason;
Unless my tears were flames, my curses courtships;
The killing of my Son, a kindness to me,
Why should he send to me, or with what safety
(Examining the ruin he had wrought me)
Though at that time, my pious pity found him,
And my word fixed; I am troubled, strongly troubled.
The Gentlemen are come,
Then bid 'em welcome—I must retire. 
You are welcome home Gentlemen.
I thank you friend, I would speak with your Lady.
I'll let her understand. 
It shall befit you,
How do I look Sir, in this handsome trim? 
Me thinks I am wondrous brave.
You are very decent.
These by themselves, without more helps of nature,
Would set a woman hard; I know 'em all,
And where their first aims light; I'll lay my head on it,
I'll take her eye, as soon as she looks on me,
And if I come to speak once, woe be to her,
I have her in a noose, she cannot scope me;
I have their several lasts.
You are thoroughly studied,
But tel me Sir, being unacquainted with her,
As you confess you are—
That's not an hours work,
I'll make a nun forget her beads in two hours.
She being set in years next, none of those lusters
Appearing in her eye,, that warm the fancy;
Nor nothing in her face, but handsome ruins.
I love old stories; those live believed, Authentic,
When 20. of your modern faces, are called in,
For new opinion paintings, and corruptions,
Give me an old confirmed face; besides she saved me,
She saved my life, have I not cause to love her?
Shoe's rich and of a constant state, a fair one
Have I not cause to woo her? I have tried sufficient,
All your young Phillies, I think this back has tried 'em,
And smarted for it too: they run away with me,
Take bit between the teeth, and play the Devils;
A stayed pace now becomes my years; a sure one,
Where I may sit and crack no girths.
How miserable,
If my Mother should confirm, what I suspect now,
Beyond all humane cure were my condition?
Then I shall wish, this body had been so too,
Here comes the Lady Sir.
Excellent Lady,
To show I am a creature, bound to your service,
And only yours—
Keep at that distance Sir;
For if you stir—
I am obedient,
She has found already, I am for her turn;
With what a greedy hawks eye she beholds me?
Mark how she musters all my parts.
A goodly Gentleman,
Of a more manly set, I never looked on.
Mark, mark her eye still; mark but the carriage of 'em
How happy am I now; since my Son fell,
He fell not, by a base unnoble hand?
As that still troubled me; how far more happy
Shall my revenge be, since the sacrifice,
I offer to his grave, shall be both worthy,
A Sons untimely loss, and a Mothers sorrow?
Sir, I am made believe it; she is mine own,
I told you what a spell I carried with me,
All this time does she spend, in contemplation,
Of that unmatched delight: I shall be thankful to ye;
And if you please to know my house, to use it;
To take it for your own.
Who waits without there?
How now? what means this, Lady?
Bind him fast.
Are these the bride-lases you prepare for me?
The colours that you give?
Fie gentle Lady,
This is not noble dealing.
Be you satiffied,
It seems you are a stranger to this meaning,
You shall not be so long
Do you call this wooing—Is there no end of women's persecutions?
Must I needs fool into mine own destruction?
Have I not had fair warnings, and enough too?
Still pick the Devils teeth? you are not mad Lady;
Do I come fairly, and like a Gentleman,
To offer you that honour?
You are deceived Sir
You come besotted, to your own destruction:
I sent not for you; what honour can ye add to me,
That brake that staff of honour, my age leaned on?
That robbed me of that right, made me a Mother?
Hear me thou wretched man, hear me with terror,
And let thine own bold folly shake thy soul,
Hear me pronounce thy death, that now hangs o'er thee,
Thou desperate fool; who bad thee seek this ruin?
What mad unmanly fate, made thee discover
Thy cursed face to me again? wast not enough
To have the fair protection of my house,
When misery and justice, cloose pursued thee?
When thine own bloody sword, cried out against thee,
Hatched in the life of him? yet I forgave thee;
My hospitable word, even when I saw
The goodliest branch of all my blood, lopped from me,
Did I not Seal still to thee?
I am gon.
And when thou went to Imp thy misery,
Did I not give thee means? but hark ungrateful,
Was it not thus? to hide thy face and fly me?
To keep thy name for ever from my memory?
Thy cursed blood and kindred; did I not swear then
If ever, (in this wretched life thou hast left me,
Short and unfortunate,) I saw thee again,
Or came but to the knowledge, where thou wanderdst,
To call my vow back, and pursue with vengeance
With all the miseries a Mother suffers?
I was borne to be hanged, there's no avoiding it.
And dare thou with this impudence appear here?
Walk like the winding sheet my Son was put in,
Stand with those wounds?
I am happy now again;
Happy the hour I fell, to find a Mother,
So pious good, and excellent in sorrows.
The Governors come in.
O let him enter.
I have fooled my self a fair thread of all my fortunes,
This strikes me most; not that I fear to perish,
But that this unmanerly boldness, has brought me to it.
Are these fit preparations for a wedding Lady?
I came prepared a guest.
O give me justice;
As ever you will leave a virtuous name,
Do justice, justice, Sir.
You need not ask it,
I am bound to it.
Justice upon this man
That kilt my Son.
Do you confess the act?
Yes Sir.
Rutillio?
It is the same.
How fell he thus?
Here will be sorrow for the good Arnoldo.
Take heed Sir what you say.
I have weighed it well,
I am the man, nor is it life I start at;
Only I am unhappy I am poor,
Door in expense of lives, there I am wretched,
That I have not two lives lent me for his sacrifice;
One for her Son, another for her sorrows.
Excellent Lady, now rejoice again,
For though I cannot think, you're pleased in blood,
Nor with that greedy thirst pursue your vengeance;
The tenderness, even in those tears denies that;
Yet let the world believe, you loved Duarte;
The unmatched courtesies you have done my miseries,
Without this forfeit to the law, would charge me
To tender you this life, and proud t'would please you.
Shall I have justi•e?
Yes.
I'll ask it for ye,
I'll follow it my self, against my self.
Sir, It is most sit I dye; dispatch it quickly,
The monstrous burden of that grief she labours with
Will kill her else, then blood on blood lies on me;
Had I a thousand lives, I'd give i'm all,
Before I would draw one tear more from that virtue.
Be not too cruel Sir, and yet his bold sword—
But his life cannot restore that he's a man too—
Of a fair promise, but alas my Sons dead;
If I have justice, must it kill him?
Yes.
If I have not, it kills me, strong and goodly!
Why should he perish too?
It lies in your power,
You only may accuse him, or may quit him.
Be there no other witnesses?
Not any.
And if I save him, will not the world proclaim,
I have forgot a Son, to save a murderer?
And yet he looks not like one, he looks manly.
Pity so brave a Gentleman should perish.
She cannot be so hard, so cruel hearted.
Will you pronounce? yet stay a little Sir.
Rid your self Lady, of this misery;
And let me go, I do but breed more tempests,
With which you are already, to much shaken.
Do now, pronounce; I will not hear.
You shall not,
Yet turn and see good Madam.
Do not wonder.
It is he, restored again, thank the good Doctor,
Pray do not stand amazed, it is Duarte;
Is well, is safe again.
O my sweet Son.
I will not press my wonder now with questions—
Sir, I am sorry for that cruelty,
I urged against you.
Madam it was but justice.
It is true, the Doctor heald this body again,
But this man heald my soul, made my mind perfect,
The good sharp lessons his sword read to me, saved me;
For which, if you loved me dear Mother,
Honour and love this man.
You sent this letter,
My boldness makes me blush now.
I'll wipe of that,
And with this kiss, I take you for my husband,
Your woings done Sir; I believe you love me,
And that's the wealth I look for now.
You have it.
You have ended my desire to all my wishes.
Now it is a wedding again. And if Hypollita,
Make good, what with the hazard of her life,
She undertook, the evening will set clear.
After a stormy day.
Here comes the Lady.
With fair Zenocia,
Health with life again,
Restored unto her.
The gift of her goodness.
Let us embrace, I am of your order too,
And though I once despaired of women, now,
I find they relish much of Scorpions,
For both have stings, and both can hurt, and cure too;
But what have been your fortunes?
We'll defer
Our story, and at time more fit, relate it.
Now all that reverence virtue, and in that
Zenocias constancy, and perfect love,
Or for her sake Arnoldo, join with us
In the honour of this Lady.
She deserves it.
Hypollitas life, shall make that good hereafter,
Nor will I alone, better my self but others:
For these whose wants perhaps, have made their actions
Not altogether innocent, shall from me
Be so supplied; that need should not compel them,
To any course of life, but what the law
Shall give allowance to.
Sulp. Your Ladishipps creatures.
Be so and no more, you man-huckster.
And worthy Leopold, you that with such fervour,
So long have sought me, and in that deserved me,
Shall now find full reward, for all your travels,
Which you have made more dear, by patient sufferance.
And though my violent dotage did transport me,
Beyond those bounds, my modesty should have kept in,
Though my desires were loose, from unchaste art,
Heaven knows I am f•ee.
The thought of that's dead to me;
I gladly take your offer.
Do so Sir,
A peace of cracked gold, ever will weigh down
Silver that's whole.
You shall be all my guests,
I must not be denied.
Come my Zenocia.
Our bark at length has found a quiet harbour;
And the unspotted progress of our loves
Ends not alone in safety but reward,
To instruct others, by our fair example;
That though good purposes, are long withstood,
The hand of Heaven still guides such as are good.
SO free this work is, Gentlemen, from offence,
That we are confident, it needs no defence
From us, or from the Poets—wee dare look.
On any man, that brings his Table-booke
To write down, what again he may repeat
At some great Table, to deserve his meat.
Let such come swelled with malice, to apply
What it mirth here, there for an injury.
Nor Lord, nor Lady we have taxed; nor State,
Nor any private person, their poor hate
Will be starved here, for envy shall not find,
One touch that may be wrested to her mind.
And yet despair not Gentlemen, The play
Is quick and witty; so the Poets say,
And we believe them; the plot neat, and new,
Fashiond like those, that are approved by you.
Only twill crave attention, in the most;
Because one point unmarked, the whole is lost
Hear first then, and judge after, and be free,
And as our cause is, let our censure be.
WHy there should be an Epilogue to a Play.
I know no cause, the old and usual way,
For which they were made, was to entreat the grace
Of such as were spectators in this place,
And time, it is to no purpose; for I know
What you resolve already to bestow,
Will not be altered, what so ere I say,
In the behalf of us, and of the Play:
Only to quit our doubts, if you think fit,
You may, or cry it up; or silence it.
WEe wish, if it were possible, you knew
What we would give for this nights look, if new?
It being our ambition to delight
Our kind spectators with what's good, and right.
Yet so far know, and credit me, it was made
By such, as were held work-men in their Trade,
At a time too, when they as I divine,
Were truly merry, and drank lusty wine.
The nectar of the Muses; Some are here
I dare presume, to whom it did appear.
A well-drawne piece, which gave a lawful birth
To passionate Scoenes mixed with no vulgar mirth.
But unto such to whom it is known by fame
From others, perhaps only by the name.
I am a suitor, that they would prepare
Sound palats, and then judge their bill of fare.
It were injustice to decry this now
For being like'd before, you may allow
(Your candor safe) what's taught in the old schools,
All such as lived before you, were not fools.
I Spake much in the Prologue for the Play,
To its desert I hope, yet you might say
Should I change now from that, which then was meant,
Or in a syllable grow less confident.
I were weake-hearted. I am still the same
In my opinion, and forbear to frame
Qualification, or excuse: If you
Concur with me, and hold my judgement true.
Show it with any sign, and from this place,
Or send me off exploded, or with grace.

