BOy.
Sir?
If my wife seek me, tell her that
Designs of weight, too heavy for her knowledge,
Exact my privacy.
I shall, sir.
Do then,
And leave me to my self.
Tic a raw morning,
And would you please to interpret that for duty
Which you may construe boldness, I could wish
To arm your self against it, you would use
More of my service.
I have heate within here,
A noble heat (good boy) to keep it off,
I shall not freeze; deliver my excuse, 
And you have done your part.
That is prevented,
My Lady follows you.
Since I must be crossed then,
Let her perform that office.
I obey you. 
Prithee to bed; to be thus fond's more tedious
Then if I were neglected.
Tic the fault then
Of love and duty which I would fall under,
Rather then want that care which you may challenge
As due to my obedience.
I confess
This tenderness argues a loving wife,
And more deserves my hearts best thanks then anger.
Yet I must tell ye Sweet, you do exceed
In your affection, if you would engross me
To your delights alone.
I am not jealous,
If my embraces have distasted you,
As I must grant you every way so worthy
That tic not in weak woman to deserve you,
Much less in miserable me, that want
Those graces some more fortunate are stored with.
Seek any whom you please, and I will study
With my best service to deserve those favours,
That shall yield you contentment.
You are mistaken.
No, I am patient sir, and so good morrow;
I will not be offensive.
Hear my reasons.
Though in your life a widows bed receives me,
For your sake I must love it. May she prosper
That shall succeed me in it, and your ardour
Last longer to her.
By the love I bear
First to my Countries peace, next to thy self
To whom compared, my life I rate at nothing;
Stood here a Lady that were the choice abstract
Of all the beauties nature ever fashioned,
Or Art gave ornament to, compared to thee,
Thus as thou art obedient and loving,
I should contemn and loath her.
I do believe ye.
How I am blessed
In my assured belief? this is unfeigned;
And why this sadness then?
Why Juliana,
Believe me, these my sad and dull retirements,
My often, nay almost continued fasts,
Sleep banished from my eyes, all pleasures strangers,
Have neither root nor growth from any cause
That may arrive at woman. Should thou be,
As chastity forbid, false to my bed,
I should lament my fortune, perhaps punish
Thy falsehood, and then study to forget thee:
But that which like a never emptied spring,
Feeds high the torrent of my swelling grief,
Is what my Country suffers; there's a ground
Where sorrow may be planted, and spring up,
Though yielding rage and womanish despair,
And yet not shame the owner.
I do believe it true,
Yet I should think my self a happy woman,
If in this general and timely mourning,
I might or give to you, or else receive
A little lawful comfort.
Thy discretion
In this may answer for me; look on Naples
The Country where we both were born and bred,
Naples the Paradise of Italy,
As that is of the earth; Naples, that was
The sweet retreat of all the worthiest Romans,
When they had shared the spoils of the whole world;
This flourishing Kingdom, whose inhabitants
For wealth and bravery lived like petty Kings,
Made subject now to such a tyranny,
As that fair City that received her name
From Constantine the great, now in the power
Of barbarous Infidels, may forget her own,
To look with pity on our miseries,
So far in our calamities we transcend her.
For since this Arragonian tyrant Ferrand,
Ceased on the government, there's nothing left us
That we can call our own, but our afflictions,
And hardly those; the Kings strange cruelty,
Equals all presidents of Tyranny.
Equal say you:
He has out gone, the worst compared to him;
Nor Phalaris, nor Dionisius,
Caligula, nor Narrow can be mentioned;
They yet as Kings, abused their regal power;
This as a Merchant, all the Countries fat,
He wholly does engross unto himself;
Our Oils he buys at his own price, then sells them
To us, at dearer rates; our Plate and Jewels,
Under a fayn'd pretence of public use,
He borrows; which denied, his Instruments force.
The rases of our horses, he takes from us;
Yet keeps them in our pastures; rapes of Matrons,
And Virgins, are too frequent; never man
Yet thanked him for a pardon; for Religion,
It is a thing he dreams not off.
I have heard,
How true it is, I know not; that he sold
The Bishop-prick of Tarent to a Jew,
For thirteen thousand Ducats.
I was present,
And saw the money paid??? the day would leave me,
Ere I could number out his impious actions;
Or what the miserable Subject suffers;
And can you entertain in such a time,
A thought of dalliance? tears, and sighs, and groans,
Would better now become you.
They indeed are,
The only weapons, our poor Sex can use,
When we are injured, and they may become us;
But for men that were born free men, of Rank;
That would be registered Fathers of their Country;
And to have on their Tombs in Golden Letters,
The noble stile of Tyrant killers, written;
To weep like fools, and women and not like wise men.
To practise a redress, deserves a name,
Which fits not me to give.
Thy grave reproof:
If what thou dost desire, were possible
To be effected? might well argue it,
As wise as loving; but if you consider,
With what strong guards, this Tyrant is defended:
Ruffians, and malcontents drawn from all quarters;
That only know, to serve his impious will;
The Citadels built by him in the neck
Of this poor City; the invincesible strength,
Nature by Art assisted, gave this Castle;
And above all his fear; admitting no man
To see him, but unarmed; it being death
For any to approach him with a weapon.
You must confess, unless our hands were Canons,
To batter down these walls; our weak breath mines,
To blow his Forts up; or our curses lightning,
To force a passage to him; and then blast him;
Our power is like to yours, and we like you;
Weep our misfortunes.
Walls of Brass resist not
A noble undertaking: nor can vice,
Raise any Bulwrack, to make good the place,
Where virtue seeks to enter; then to fall
In such a brave attempt, were such an honour;
That Brutus, did he live again would envy.
Were my dead Father in you, and my Brothers;
Nay, all the Ancestors I am derived from;
As you, in being what you are, are all these.
I had rather wear a mourning Garment for you,
And should be more proud of my widowhood;
You dying for the freedom of this Country;
Then if I were assured, I should enjoy
A perpetuity of life and pleasure,
With you the Tyrant living.
Till this minute,
I never heard thee speak; O more then woman!
And more to be beloved; can I find out
A Cabinet, to lock a secret in,
Of equal trust to thee? all doubts, and fears,
That scandalise your sex, be far from me;
Thou shalt partake my near and dearest councels,
And further them with thine.
I will be faithful.
Know then this day, stand heaven propitious to us,
Our liberty begins.
In Ferrands death?
It is plotted love, and strongly, and believe it,
For nothing else could doe it; it was the thought,
How to proceed in this design and end it,
That made strange my embraces.
Cursed be she,
That's so indulgent to her own delights,
That for their satisfaction, would give
A stop to such a glorious enterprise:
For me, I would not for the world, I had been
Guilty of such a crime; go on and prosper.
Go on my dearest Lord, I love your Honour
Above my life; nay, yours; my Prayers go with you;
Which I will strengthen with my tears: the wrongs
Of this poor Country, edge your sword; O may it
Pierce deep into this Tyrants heart, and then
When you return bathed in his guilty blood,
I'll wash you clean with fountains of true joy.
But who are your assistants? though I am
So covetous of your glory, that I could wish
You had no sharer in it. 
Be not curious.
They come, how ever you command my bosom,
To them I would not have you seen.
I am gon Sir,
Be confident; and may my resolution
Be present with you. 
Such a Masculine spirit,
With more then women's virtues, were a dower
To weigh down a Kings fortune.
Good day to you. 
You are an early stirrer.
What new face,
Bring you along?
If I stand doubted Sir?
As by your looks I guess it: you much injure
A man that loves, and truly loves this Country,
With as much zeal as you doe; one that hates
The Prince by whom it suffers, and as deadly;
One that dares step as far to gain my freedom,
As any he that breathes; that wears a sword
As sharp as any's.
Nay, no more comparisons.
What you but whisper, I dare speak aloud,
Stood the King by; have means to put in act too
What you but coldly plot; if this deserve then
Suspicion in the best, the boldest, wisest?
Pursue your own intents, il'e follow mine;
And if I not out-strip you???
Be assured Sir,
A conscience like this can never be elide
To treachery.
Who durst speak so much,
But one that is like us a sufferer,
And stands as we affected?
You are consent
And all undone; every Intelligencer
Speaks treason with like licence; is not this
Ronvere, that hath for many years been trained
In Ferrands School, a man in trust and favour,
Rewarded too and highly?
Grant all this,
The thought of what he was, being as he is now;
A man disgraced, and with contempt thrown o???f;
Will spur him to revenge, as swift as they,
That never were in favour.
Poor and childish.
His regiment is cast, that is most certain;
And his command in the Castle given away.
That on my knowledge.
Grosser still, what shepherd
Would yield the poor remainder of his flock,
To a known wolf; though he put on the habit,
Of a most faithful dog, and bark like one?
As this but only talks.
Yes, he has means too.
I know it to my grief, weak men I know it;
To make his peace, if there were any war
Between him and his Master, betraying
Our innocent lives.
You are too suspicious;
And I have born too much, beyon'd my temper,
Take your own ways, i'll leave you.
You may stay now;
You have enough, and all indeed you fished for;
But one word Gentlemen: have you discovered
To him alone our plot?
To him and others, that are at his devotion.
Worse and worse:
For were he only conscious of our purpose,
Though with the breach of Hospitable laws,
In my own house, id silence him for ever:
But what is past my help, is past my care,
I have a life to loose.
Have better hopes.
And when you know, with what charge I have furthered
Your noble undertaking, you will swear me
Another man; the guards I have corrupted:
And of the choice of all our noblest youths,
Attired like virgins; such as Hermits would
Welcome to their sad cells, prepared a Mask;
As done for the Kings pleasure.
For his safety
I rather fear; and as a pageant to
Usher our ruin.
We as Torch-bearers
Will waite on these, but with such art and cunning;
I have conveyed sharp poniards in the Wax,
That we may pass, though searched through all his guards
Without suspicion, and in all his glory,
Oppress him, and with safety.
It is most strange.
To be effected.
You are doubtful still.
But we resolved to follow him, and if you
Desist now Virolet, we will say it is fear,
Rather then providence. 
And so we leave you, 
To your wise doubts, and to my better councels;
Oh! pardon me my Lord, and trust me too;
Let me not like Cassandra prophecy truths,
And never be believed, before the mischief:
I have heard all; know this Ronvere a villain,
A villain that hath tempted me, and plotted
This for your ruin, only to make way
To his hopes in my embraces; at more leisure
I will acquaint you, wherefore I conceil'd it
To this last minute; if you stay you are lost,
And all prevention too late. I know,
And it is to me known only, a dark cave
Within this house, a part of my poor dower,
Where you may lye concealed, as in the center,
Till this rough blast be ore; where there is ayre,
More then to keep in life; Ferrand will find you,
So curious his fears are.
It is better fall
Then hide my head, now it was thine own advice,
My friends engaged too.
You stand further bound,
Then to weak men that have betrayed themselves,
Or to my Council, though then just and loyal:
Your fancy hath been good, but not your judgement,
In choice of such to side you, will you leap
From a steep Tower, because a desperate fool
Does it, and trusts the wind to save his hazard?
There's more expected from you; all men's eyes are fixed
On Viriolet, to help not hurt them;
Make good their hopes and ours, you have sworn often,
That you dare credit me; and allowed me wise
Although a woman; even Kings in great Actions,
Waite opportunity and so must you Sir,
Or loose your understanding.
Thou art constant;
I am uncertain fool, a most blind fool;
Be thou my guide.
I. I fail to direct you,
For torment or reward, when I am wretched,
May constancy forsake me.
I've my satety.
Why are you rapt thus?
Peace, thou art a fool.
But if I were a flatterer like your worship,
I should be wise and rich too;
There are few else that prosper, bawds excepted,
They hold an equal place there.
A shrewed knave;
But O the King, the happy King!
Why happy?
In bearing a great burden.
What bears he,
That's born on Princes shoulders?
A Crowns weight,
Which sets more heavy on his head, then the ore
Slaves dig out of the Mines, of which it is made.
Thou worthily art his fool, to think that heavy
That carries him in the ayre; the reverence due
To that most sacred Gold, makes him adored,
His Foot-steps kissed, his smiles to raise a beggar
To a Lords fortune; and when he but frowns,
The City quakes.
Or the poor Cuckolds in it,
Cox-combs I should say, I am of a fool.
Grown a Philosopher, to hear this parasite.
The delicates he is served with see and envy,
I had rather have an Onion with a stomach,
Then these without one.
The Celestial Music, 
Such as the motion of the eternal spheres
Yields Jove, when he drinks Nectar.
Here's a fine knave, yet hath to many fellows.
Then the beauties,
That with variety of choice embraces, 
Renew his age.
Help him to crotch rather,
And the French Cringe, they are excellent Surgeons that way.
O Majesty! let others think of heaven,
While I contemplate thee.
This is not Atheism, but Court observance.
Now the God appears, ushered with earth-quakes.
Base Idolatry. 
These meates are poisoned, hang
The Cooks; no note more, on
Forfeit of your fingers; doe you
Envy me a minutes slumber, what are these?
The Ladies appointed by your Majesty.
To the purpose, for what appointed?
For your graces pleasure.
To suck away the little blood is left me,
By my continual cares; I am not apt now,
Enjoy them first, ta??????e of my diet once;
And your turn served, for fifty Crowns a piece
Their Husbands may redeem them.
Great Sir, mercy.
I am deaf, why stare you? is what we command
To be disputed? who's this? bring you the dead
T'upbrai'd me to my face?
Hold Emperor;
Hold might of Kings, I am thy vassal,
Thy Foot-stool, that durst not presume to look
On thy offended face.
Castruchio rise.
Let not the lightning of thy eye consume me,
Nor hear that Musical tongue, in dreadful thunder,
That speak???s all mercy.
Here's no slattering rogue.
Ferrand, that is the Father of his people,
The glory of mankind.
No more, no word more;
And while I tell my troubles to my self,
Be Statues without motion or voice,
Though to be flattered, is an itch to greatness,
It now offends me.
Here's the happy man;
But speak who dares.
When I was innocent;
I yet remember, I could eat and sleep,
Walk unaffrighted, but now terrible to others:
My guards cannot keep fear from me
It still pursues me; Oh! my wounded conscience,
The Bed I would rest in, is stuffed with thorns;
The grounds strewn o'er with adders, and with aspicks
Where ere I set my foot, but I am in,
And what was got with cruelty, with blood,
Must be defended, though this lifes a hell,
I fear a worse hereafter??? ha!
My Lord. 
Welcome Ronvere, welcome my golden plummet
With which I sound mine enemies depths and angers,
Hast thou discovered.
All as you could wish Sir,
The Plot, and the contrivers; was made one
Of the conspiracy.
Is Virolet in?
The head of all, he only scented me:
And from his fear, that I plaid false is fled;
The rest I have in fetters
Death and hell.
Next to my mortal foe the pirate Sesse,
I aimed at him; he's virtuous, and wise,
A lover of his freedom and his countries
Dangerous to such as govern by the sword,
And so to me: no tract which way he went,
No means to overtake him?
Ther's some hope left;
But with a rough hand, to be seas'd upon.
What is it?
If any know, or where he is,
Or which way he is fled, it is his wife;
Her with his Father I have apprehended,
And brought among the rest.
It was wisely ordered,
Go fetch them in, and let my executioners 
Appear in horror with the rack.
I take it signeur, this is no time for you to flatter,
Or me to fool in.
Thou art wise in this, let's off, it is unsafe to be ne'er Jove,
When he begins to thunder.
Good morality. 
I that have pierced into the hearts of men;
Forced them to lay open with my looks,
Secrets whose leas??? discovery was death,
Will rend for what concerns my life, the fortress,
Of a weak women's faith. 
What ere we suffer,
The weight, that loads a Traitors
Heart sit ever, heavy on thine.
As we are caught by thee,
Fall thou by others.
Pish poor fools, your curses will
Never reach me.
Now by my ??irolets life;
Father, this is a glory???us stage of murder.
Here are five properties too, and such spectators,
As will expect good action, to the life;
Let us perform our parts, and we shall live,
When these are rotten, would we might begin once;
Are you the Master of the company?
Troth you are tedious now.
She does deride me.
Thee and thy Power, if one poor syllable
Could win me, an assurance of thy favour,
I would not speak it, I desire to be
The great example of thy cruelty,
To whet which one, know Ferrand, I alone
Can make discovery, where my Virolet is,
Whose life, I know thou aim at, but if tortures
Compel me to it, may hope of heaven for sake me;
I dare thy worst.
Are we contemned.
Thou art,
Thou and thy Ministers, my life is thine;
But in the death, the Victory shall be mine.
We have such a Mistress here to teach us courage,
That cowards might learn from her.
You are slow; 
Begin the Scene thou miserable fool
For so I'll make thee.
It is not in thy reach;
I am happy in my sufferings, thou most wretched.
So brave! Isle tame you yet, pluck hard villains;
Is she insensible? no sigh nor groan? or is she dead?
No tyrant, though I suffer
More then a woman, beyond flesh and blood;
Tic in a cause so honourable, that I scorn
With any sign that may express a sorrow
To show I do repent.
Confess yet,
And thou shall be safe.
Tic wrapped up in my soul,
From whence thou can not force it.
I will be
Ten days a killing thee.
Be twenty thousand,
My glory lives the longer.
Tic a miracle,
She tires th'executioners,
And me.
Unloose her, I am conquered, I must take
Some other way; reach her my chair, in honour
Of her invincible fortitude.
Will you not
Dispatch the rest?
When I seem merciful,
Assure thy self Ronvere, I am most cruel.
Thou wonder of thy sex, and of this Nation,
That hast changed my severity to mercy,
Not to thy self alone, but to thy people,
In which I do include these men, my enemies:
Unbind them.
This is strange.
For your intent
Against my life, which you dare not deny,
I only ask one service.
Above hope.
There rides a Pirate near, the Duke of Sesse,
My enemy and this Countries, that in bonds
Holds my dear friend Ascanio: free this friend,
Or bring the Pirates head; besides your pardon,
And honour of the action, your reward
Is forty thousand Ducats. And because
I know that Virolet is as bold as wise,
Be he your General, as pledge of your faith,
That you will undertake it: let this old man,
And this most constant Matron stay with me;
Of whom, as of my self, I will be careful;
She shall direct you where her husband is.
Make choice of any ship you think most useful.
They are rigged for you.
We with joy accept it.
And will proclaim King Ferrant merciful.
The mystery of this, my Lord? or are you
Changed in your nature?
Isle make thee private to it.
The lives of these weak men, and desperate woman,
Would no way have secured me, had I took them;
Tic Virolet I aim at; he has power,
And knows to hurt. If they encounter Sesse,
And he prove conqueror, I am assured
They'll find no mercy: if that they prove victors,
I shall recover with my friend; his head
I most desire of all men.
Now I have it.
Isle make thee understand the drift of all.
So we stand sure, thus much for those that fall. 
Ley here before the wind; up with her Canvas
And let her work, the wind begins to which???le;
Clap all her streamers on, and let her dance,
As if she were the Minion of the Ocean.
Let her bestride the billows till they roar,
And curl their wanton heads. Ho, below there:
Ho, ho, within.
Ley her North-east, and thrust her mizzen out,
The day grows fair and clear, and the wind Courts us.
O for a lusty sail now, to give chase to.
A stubborn Bark, that wo'd but bear up to us,
And change a broadside bravely.
Whore's the Duke?
I have not seen him stir to day.
O Gunner,
What bravery dwells in his age, and what valour?
And to his friends, what gentleness and bounty?
How long have we been inhabitants at Sea here?
Some fourteen years.
By fourteen lives I swear then,
This Element never nourished such a Pirate;
So great, so fearless, and so fortunate,
So patient in his want, in Act so valiant.
How many sail of well manned ships before us,
As the Bonuto does the flying fish,
Have we pursued and scowerd, that to outstrip us,
They have been fain to hang their very shirts on?
What Galleys have we banged, and sunk, and taken;
Whose only fraughts were fire, and stern defiance?
And nothing spoke but Bullet in all these.
How like old Neptune have I seen our General
Standing in the Poop, and tossing his steel Trident,
Commanding both the Sea and Winds to serve him?
His daughter too, which is the honour, Boatswain,
Of all her sex; that Martial maid.
A brave wench.
How oftentimes, a fight being new begun,
Has she leaped down, and took my Linstock from me,
And crying, now fly right, fired all my chasers?
Then like the Image of the warlike Goddess,
Her Target braced upon her arm, her Sword drawn,
And anger in her eyes, leaped up again,
And bravely hauled the Bark. I have wondered Botswain,
That in a body made so delicate,
So soft for sweet embraces, so much fire,
And manly soul, not starting at a danger.
Her Noble father got her in his fury,
And so she proves a soldier.
This to I wonder at,
Taking so many strangers as he does,
He uses them with that respect and coolness,
Not making prize, but only borrowing
What may supply his want: nor that for nothing;
But renders back what they may stand in need of,
And then parts lovingly: Where, if he take
His Countryman, that should be nearest to him,
And stand most free from danger, he sure pays for it:
He drowns or hangs the men, ransacks the Bark,
Then gives her up a Bonfire to his fortune.
The wrongs he has received from that dull Country,
That's all I know has purchased all his cruelty.
We fare the better; cheerly, cheerly boys,
The ship runs merrily; my Captain's melancholy,
And nothing cures that in him but a Sea-fight:
I hope to meet a sail boy, and a right one.
That's my hope too; I am ready for the pastime.
In the mean time let's bestow a song upon him,
To shake him from his dumps, and bid good day to him.
Ho, in the hold. 
Here, here.
To the main top boy.
And thou kenst a ship that dares defy us,
Here's Gold.
I am gon. 
Come sirs, a quaint Levied. 
To waken our brave General. Then to our labour.
I thank you loving mates; I thank you all.
There's to prolong your mirth, &amp; good morrow to you.
Take this from me, you're honest valiant friends;
And such we must make much of. Not a sail stirring?
Not any within ken yet.
Without doubt Lady,
The wind standing so fair and full upon us,
We shall have sport anon. But noble General,
Why are you still so sad? you take our edge off;
You make us dull, and spirit-lesse.
Isle tell ye,
Because I will provoke you to be fortunate;
For when you know my cause, twill double arm you.
This woman never knew it yet; my daughter,
Some discontents she has.
Pray sir go forward.
These fourteen years, I have stoed it here at Sea,
Where the most curious thought could never find it.
Call up the Master, and all the Mates.
Good morrow.
Good morrow to our General, good one,
And to that Noble Lady all good wishes.
I thank you Master.
Mark me, thus it is then;
Which I did never think to have discovered,
Till full revenge had wooed me; but to satisfy
My faithful friends, thus I cast off my burden.
In that short time I was a Courtier,
And followed that most hated of all Princes,
Ferrant the full example of all mischiefs,
Compelled to follow to my soul a stranger,
It was my chance one day to play at Chess
For some few Crowns, with a minion of this Kings,
A mean poor man, that only served his pleasures;
Removing of a Rook, we grew to words;
From this to hotter anger: to be short,
I got a blow.
How, how my Noble father?
A blow my girl, which I had soon repayd,
And sunk the slave for ever, had not odds
Thrust in betwixt us. I went away disgraced???
For honours sake not so sir.
For that time, wench;
But called upon him, like a Gentleman,
By many private friends; knocked at his valour,
Courted his honour hourly to repair me;
And tho he were a thing my thoughts made slight on,
And only worth the fury of my footman,
Still I pursued him Nobly.
Did he escape you?
My old brave father, could you sit down so coldly?
Have patience, and know all. Pursued him fairly,
Till I was laughed at, scorned, my wrongs made maygames.
By him unjustly wronged, should be all justice,
The slave protected; yet at length I found him,
Found him, when he supposed all had been buried;
And what I had received durst not be questioned;
And then he fell, under my Sword he fell,
For ever sunk; his poor life, like the ayre,
Blown in an empty bubble, burst, and left him,
No Noble wind of memory to raise him.
But then began my misery, I fled;
The Kings frowns following, and my friends despairs;
No hand that durst relieve: my Country fearful,
Basely and weakly fearful of a tyrant;
Which made his bad will worse, stood still and wondered,
Their virtues bedrid in i'm; then my girl,
A little one, I snatched thee from thy nurse,
The model of thy fathers miseries:
And some small wealth was fit for present carriage,
And got to Seal; where I professed my anger,
And will do, whilst that base ungrateful Country,
And that bad King, have blood or means to quench me.
Now ye know all.
We know all, and admire all;
Go on and do all still, and still be fortunate.
Had you done less, or lost this Noble anger,
You had been worthy then men's empty pities,
And not their wonders. Go on, and use your justice;
And use it still with that fell violence
It first appeared to you; if you go less,
Or take a doting mercy to protection,
The honour of a father I disclaim in you,
Call back all duty, and will be prouder of
The infamous and base name of a whore,
Then daughter to a great Duke and a coward.
Mine own sweet Martia, no; thou know my nature,
It cannot, must not be.
I hope it shall not.
But why sir, do you keep alive still young Ascanio,
Prince of Rossana, King Ferrants most beloved one,
You took two months ago?
Why is not he flung overboard, or hanged?
Isle tell thee girl:
It were a mercy in my nature now,
So soon to break the bed of his afflictions;
I am not so far reconciled yet to him
To let him die, that were a benefit.
Besides, I keep him as a bait and diet,
To draw on more, and nearer to the King,
I look each hour to hear of his Armados,
And a hot welcome they shall have.
But hark you?
If you were overswayed with odds ???
I find you:
I would not yield; no girl, no hope of yielding,
Nor fling my self one hour into their mercies,
And give the tyrant hope to gain his Kingdom.
No, I can sink wench, and make shift to die;
A thousand doors are open, I shall hit one.
I am no niggard of my life, so it go Nobly:
All ways are equal and all hours; I care not.
Now you speak like my father.
Noble General,
If by our means they inherit ought but bangs,
The mercy of the main yard light upon us.
No, we can sink too sir, and sink low enough,
To pose their cruelties, to follow us:
And he that thinks of life, if the world go that way,
A thousand cowards suck his bones.
Let the worst come,
I can umbrage a Canon, and without much help
Turn her into the Keel; and when she has split it,
Every man knows his way, his own prayers,
And so good night I think.
We have lived all with you, 
And will die with you General.
I thank you Gentlemen.
A Sail, a Sail.
A cheerful sound.
A Sail.
Of whence? of whence boy?
A lusty sail.
Look right, and look again.
She plows the Sea before her,
And fomes in the mouth.
Of whence?
I ken not yet sir.
O may she prove of Naples.
Prove the Devil,
We will spit out fire as thick as she.
Hoy.
Brave boy.
Of Naples Naples, I think of Naples, Master,
Me thinks I see the Arms.
Up, up another,
And give more certain signs. 
All to your business,
And stand but right and true???
Hang him that halts now.
Sh'as us in chase.
We will spare her our main top-saile,
He shall not look us long, we are no starters,
Down with the fore-saile too, we will spoom before her.
Gunner, good noble Gunner, for my honour
Load me but these two Minions in the chape there;
And load 'em right, that they may bid fair welcome,
And be thine eye and level as thy heart it.
Madam, Isle scratch 'em out, Isle peace 'em out else.
Ho.
Of whence now?
Of Naples, Naples, Naples.
I see her top flag how she quarters Naples.
I hear her Trumpets.
Down, she's welcome to us. 
Every man to his charge, man her in the bow well.
And place your rakers right, daughter be sparing.
I swear Isle be above sir, in the thickest,
And where most danger is, Isle seek for honour.
They have begun, hark how their Trumpets call us.
Hark how the wide mouthed Cannons sing amongst us.
Hark how they sail; out of our shells for shame sir.
Now fortune and my cause.
Be bold and conquer. 
They'll board us once again, they are tuffe &amp; valiant.
Twice we have blown 'em into the air like feathers.
And made 'em dance.
Good boys, fight bravely, manly. 
They come on yet; clap in her stern, &amp; yoke 'em.
You shall not need, I have provision for 'em;
Let 'em board once again, the next is ours.
Stand bravely to your Pikes, away, be valiant.
I have a second course of service for 'em,
Shall make the bowels of their Bark ache, hoy
The Duke fights like a Dragon. Who dares be idle. 
Down with 'em, stow 'em in.
Cut their throats, tic brotherhood to fling em into the Sea.
The Duke is hurt, so is his lovely daughter Martia.
We have the day yet. 
Pox fire'em, they have smoked us, never such plumbs yet flew.
They have rent the ship, &amp; bored a hundred holes,
She swims still lustily.
She made a brave fight, and he shall be cured,
And make a braver yet.
Bring us some Cans up, I am hot as fire. 
I am sure I am none of the coolest.
My Cannons rung like Bells. Here's to my Mistress.
The dainty Sweet brass Minion, split their fore-mast,
She never failed.
Ye did all well, and truly, like faithful honest men.
But is she rich Master? 
Rich for my Captains purpose howsoever,
And we are his. - How bravely now he shows,
Heated in blood and anger? how do you sir?
Not wounded mortally I hope?
No Master, but only wear the livery of fury.
I am hurt, and deep.
My Mistress too?
A scratch man,
My needle would ha done as much good sir,
Be provident and careful.
Prithee peace girl,
This wound is not the first blood I have blushed in,
Ye fought all like tall men, my thanks among ye,
That speaks not what my purse means, but my tongue, soldiers.
Now sir, to you that sought me out, that found me,
That found me what I am, the Tyrants Tyrant;
You that were imp'd the weak arm to his folly,
You are welcome to your death.
I do expect it,
And therefore need no complement, but waite it.
Thou bor'st the face once of a Noble Gentleman,
Ranked in the first file of the virtuous,
By every hopeful spirit, showed and pointed,
Thy Countries love; one that advanced her honour,
Not tainted with the base and servile uses
The Tyrant ties men's souls too. Tell me ??irolet,
If shame have not forsook thee, with thy credit.
No more of these Racks; what I am I am.
I hope not to go free with poor confessions;
Nor if I show ill, will I seem a monster,
By making my mind prisoner; do your worst.
When I came out to deal with you, I cast it,
Only those base inflections fit for slaves,
Because I am a Gentleman.
Thou art none.
Thou wast while thou stood good, you are now a villain
And agent for the devil.
That tongue lies.
Give me my Sword again, and stand all armed;
He prove it on ye all, I am a Gentleman,
A man as fair in honour; rate your prisoners;
How poor and like a Pedagogue it shows?
How far from Nobleness? tic fair, you may kil's;
But to defame your victory with foul language.
Go, fling him overboard; Isle teach you sir.
You cannot teach me to die. I could kill you now
With patience, in despising all your cruelties.
And make you choke with anger.
Away I say.
Stay sir, he has given you such bold language,
I am not reconciled to him yet, and therefore
He shall not have his wish observed so nearly,
To die when he please; I beseech you stay sir.
Do with him what thou wilt.
Carry him to th'Bilboes,
And clap him fast there, with the Prince.
Do Lady,
For any death you give, I am bound to bless you.
Now to your Cabin, sir; pray lean upon me,
And take your rest, the Surgeons waite all for you.
Thou make me blush to see thee bear thy fortuns;
Why, sure I have no hurt, I have not fought sure?
You bleed apace, Sir.
Ye grow cold too.
I must be ruled, no leaning,
My deepest wounds scorn Crutches.
A brave General. 
Will they not moore her?
Not till we come to the Fort,
This is too weak a place for our defences,
The Carpenters are hard at work; she swims well,
And may hold out another fight. The ship we took
Burns there to give us light.
She made a brave fight.
She put us all in fear.
Beshrew my heart did she.
Her men are gone to Candy, they are peppered,
All but this prisoner.
Sure he's a brave fellow.
A stubborn knave, but we have pulled his bravery.
Look how he looks now: come let's go serve his diet,
Which is but bread and water.
He'll grow fat on it. 
I must confess I have endured much misery,
even almost to the ruin of my spirit,
But ten times more grows my affliction,
To find my friend here.
Had we served our Country,
Or honesties, as we have served our follies,
We had not been here now?
Tic to true Virolet.
And yet my end in venturing for your safety,
Pointed at more then Ferrants will, a base one;
Some service for mine own, some for my Nation,
Some for my friend; but I am rightly paid,
That durst adventure such a Noble office,
From the most treacherous command of mischief;
You know him now?
And when I nearer knew him,
Then when I waited, Heaven be witness with me,
(And if I lie my miseries still load me)
With what tears I have wood him, with what prayers,
What weight of reasons I have laid, what dangers;
Then, when the peoples curses flew like storms;
And every tongue was whetted to defame him,
To leave his doubts, his tyrannies, his slaughters,
His fell oppressions. I know I was hated too.
And all mankind that knew him: these confess???once
Do no good to the world, to Heaven they may.
Let's study to die well, we have lived like coxcombs.
That my mis-fortune, should lose you too.
Yes;
And not only me, but many more, and better:
For my life, tic not this; or might I save yours,
And some brave friends I have engaged, let me go;
It were the meritorious death I wish for,
But we must hang or drown like whelps.
No remedy.
On my part I expect none. I know the man,
And know he has been nettled to the quick too,
I know his nature.
A most cruel nature.
His wrongs have bred him up. I cannot blame him.
He has a daughter too, the greatest scorner,
And most insulter upon misery.
For those, they are toys to laugh at, not to lead men:
A women's mirth or anger, like a meteor
Glides and is gone, and leaves no crack behind it;
Our miseries would seem like masters to us,
And shake our manly spirits into feavors,
If we respected those; the more they glory,
And raise insulting Trophies on our ruins;
The more our virtues shine in patience.
Sweet Prince, the name of death was never terrible
To him that knew to live; nor the loud torrent
Of all afflictions, singing as they swim,
A gall of heart, but to a guilty conscience:
Whilst we stand fair, but by a two-edg'd storm,
We find untimely false, like early Roses;
But to the earth, we bear our native sweetness.
Good sir go on.
When we are little children,
And cry and fret for every toy comes cross us;
How sweetly do we show, when sleep steals on us?
When we grow great, but our affections greater,
And struggle with this stubborn twin, born with us;
And tug and pull, yet still we find a Giant:
Had we not then the privilege to sleep,
Our everlasting sleep? he would make us idiots;
The memory and monuments of good men
Are more then lives, and tho their Tombs want tongues,
Yet have they eyes, that daily sweat their losses;
And such a tear from stone, no time can value.
To die both young and good, are natures curses,
As the world says; ask truth, they are bounteous blessings:
For then we reach at Heaven, in our full virtues,
And fix our selves new Stars, crowned with our goodness.
You have double armed me. 
Hark, what noise is this?
What horrid noise is the Sea pleased to sing,
A hideous Dirge to our deliverance?
Stand fast now. 
I am fixed.
We fear ye not. 
Let death appear in all shapes, we smile on him.
The Lady now.
The face of the Mask is altered.
What will she doe?
Do what she can, I care not.
She looks on you sir.
Rather she looks through me,
But yet she stirs me not.
Poor wretched slaves,
Why do you live? or if ye hope for mercy,
Why do not you houle out, and fill the hold
With lamentations, cries, and base submissions,
Worthy our scorn?
Madam, you are mistaken;
We are no slaves to you, but to blind fortune;
And if she had her eyes, and durst be certain,
Certain our friend, I would not bow unto her;
I would not cry, nor ask so base a mercy:
If you see any thing, in our appearance,
Worthy your sexes softness and your own glory?
Do it for that; and let that good reward it:
We cannot beg.
Isle make you beg, and bow too.
Madam for what?
For life; and when you hope it,
Then will I laugh and triumph on your baseness.
Madam tic true, there may be such a favour,
And we may ask it too; ask it with honour;
And thank you for that favour, nobly thank you,
Tho it be death; but when we beg a base life,
And beg it of your scorn???
You're cozened woman,
Your handsomeness may do much, but not this way;
But for your glorious hate???
Are ye so stubborn?
Death, I will make you bow.
It must be in your bed then;
There you may work me to humility.
Why, I can kill thee.
If you do it handsomely;
It may be I can thank you, else???
So glorious?
Her cruelty now works.
Yet wooed thou?
No.
Wilt thou for life sake?
No, I know your subtlety.
For honour sake?
I will not be a Pageant,
My mind was ever firm, and so Isle lose it.
Isle starve thee to it.
Isle starve my self, and cross it.
Isle lay thee on such miseries???
Isle wear 'em,
And with that wantonness, you do your Bracelets.
Isle be a month a killing thee.
Poor Lady,
Isle be a month a dying then: what's that?
There's many a Callenture outdoes your cruelty.
How might I do, in killing of his body,
To save his Noble mind? Who waits there?
Madam.
Unbolt this man, and leave those things behind you,
And so away. Now put 'em on. Uunbolt him. 
To what end?
To my end, to my will.
I will.
I thank you.
Nay, now you thank me, Isle do more. Isle tell ye,
I am a servant to your courtesy,
And so far will be wooed: but if this triumph
Be only aimed, to make your mischief glorious;
Lady, you've put a richer shroud upon me,
Which my strong mind shall suffer in.
Come hither,
And all thy bravery put into thy carriage,
For I admire thee.
Whither will this woman?
Take heed my friend.
Look as thou scorndst my cruelty:
I know thou doest.
I never feared, nor flattered.
No if thou had, thou had died, &amp; I had gloried.
I suffer now, and thou which art my prisoner,
Hast Nobly won the free power to despise me.
I love thee, and admire thee for thy Nobleness;
And for thy manly sufferance, am thy servant.
Good Lady, mock me not.
By Heaven I love thee;
And by the soul of love, am one piece with thee.
Thy mind, thy mind; thy brave, thy manly mind:
That like a Rock stands all the storms of fortune,
And beats 'em roaring back they cannot reach thee:
That lovely mind I dote on, not the body;
That mind has robed me of my liberty:
That mind has darkened all my bravery,
And into poor despised things, turned my angers.
Receive me to your love sir, and instruct me;
Receive me to your bed, and marry me:
Isle wait upon you, bless the hour I knew you.
Is this a new way?
If you doubt my faith???
First take your liberty; Isle make it perfect,
Or any thing within my power.
I love you;
But how to recompense your love with marriage?
Alas, I have a wife.
Dearer then I am?
That will adventure so much for your safety?
Forget her fathers wrongs, quit her own honour,
Pull on her for a strangers sake, all curses?
Shall this Prince have his freedom too?
Else all I love is gone, all my friends perish.
He shall.
What shall I do?
If thou despise my courtesy,
When I am dead, for grief I am forsaken,
And no soft hand left to assuage your sorrows;
Too late, but too true, curse your own cruelties.
Be wise; if she be true, no thread is left else,
To guide us from this labyrinth of mischief;
Nor no way for our friends.
Thus then, I take you:
I bind ye to my life, my love.
I take you,
And with the like bond tie my heart your servant;
W'are now almost at Harbour, within this hour,
In the dead watch, Isle have the long boat ready;
And when I give the word, be sure you enter,
Isle see ye furnished both immediately,
And like your self; some trusty man shall wait you,
The watch Isle make mine own; only my love
Requires a stronger vow, which Isle administer
Before we go.
Isle take it to confirm you.
Go in, there are the Keys, unlock his fetters,
And arm ye Nobly both; Isle be with you presently,
And s??? this loving kiss.
Be constant Lady. 
You grow so angry sir, your wound goes back???ward.
I am angry at the time, at none of you,
That sends but one poor subject for revenge;
I would have all the Court, and all the villainy,
Was ever practised under that foul Ferrand
Tyrant, and all to quench my wrath.
Be patient,
Your grace may find occasion every hour,
For certain they will seek you, to satisfy,
And to the full, your anger.
Death, they dare not:
They know that I command death, feed his hunger,
And when I let him loose???
You'll never heal sir,
If these extremes dwell in you, you are old,
And burn your spirits out with this wild angers.
Thou least, I am not old, I am as lusty
And full of manly heat as them, or thou art.
No more of that.
And dare seek out a danger;
And hold him at the swords point, when thou tremble
And creepest into thy box of salves to save thee.
O Master, I have had a dreadful dream to night!
Me-thought the ship was all on fire, and my loved Daughter,
To save her life, leapt into the Sea; where suddenly
A stranger snatched her up, and swam away with her.
It was but the heate of the fight sir. 
Look out, what's that?
The long boat as I live.
Ho, there, ith long Boat. 
What noise is that? 
I hear sir ??? 
The devil or his dam; hail her again boys.
The long boat, ho, the long boat.
Why, the long boat?
Where is the long Boat?
She is stolen off. 
Who stole her?
O my prophetic soul!
Your daughter's gone sir;
The prisoners, and six Sailors, rogues.
Mischief, six thousand plagues sale with 'em;
They are in her yet, make out.
We have ne'er a Boat. 
Who knew of this trick?
Weigh Anchors and away.
We have no wind sir,
They'll beat us with their Oars.
Then sink 'em Gunner,
O sink 'em, sink 'em, sink 'em, claw 'em Gunner;
As ever thou hast loved me.
I'll do reason,
But i'll be hanged before I hurt the Lady. 
Who knew of this? 
We stand all clear.
What devil
Put this base trick into her tail? my daughter,
And run away with rogues! I hope she's sunk, 
Or torn to pieces with the shot; rots find her,
The leprosy of whore, stick ever to her, 
O she has ruined my revenge.
She is gone sir,
I cannot reach her with my shot.
Rise winds, blow till you burst the air,
Blow till ye burst the air, and swell the Seas,
That they may sink the stars, O dance her, dance her;
Shes impudently wanton, dance her, dance her,
Mount her upon your surges, cool her, cool her
She runs hot like a whore, cool her, cool her;
O now a shot to sink her; come, cut Cables;
I will away, and where she sets her foot
Although it be in Ferrants court, isle follow her,
And such a fathers vengeance shall she suffer???
Dare any man stand by me?
All, all.
All sir.
And the same cup you taste.
Cut Cables then;
For I shall never sleep, nor know what peace is,
Till I have plucked her heart out;
O maine there. 
You are too gentle sir. 
You are too careless:
The creatures I have made, no way regard me:
Why should I give you names, titles of honour
Rob families, to fill your private houses
For your advancement, draw all curses on me,
VVake tedious winter nights, to make them happy
That for me break no slumber?
What we can,
We dare doe
Why is your Sovereigns life then
(In which you live, and in whose fall your honours,
Your wealth, your pomp, your pride and all must suffer)
No better guarded? O my cruel Stars,
That mark me out a King, raising me on
This pinnacle of greatness, only to be
The nearer blasting!
What think you now Castruchio?
Is not this a merry life?
Still thou art couzend;
It is a glorious royal discontentment;
How bravely it becomes him!
To be made
The common butt, for every slave to shoot at;
No peace, no rest I take, but their alarams
Beat at my heart: why do I live, or seek then,
To add a day more to these glorious troubles?
Or to what end when all I can arrive at,
Is but the summing up of fears and sorrows,
What power has my command, when from my bosom
Ascanio my most dear, and loved Ascanio,
Was snatched, spite of my will, spite of my succour,
And by mine own proud slave retained most miserable?
And still that villains lives to nip my pleasures,
It being not within my power to reach him.
Time may restore all this; and would you hear
Whose counsel never failed you.
Tell me no more,
I faint beneath the burden of my cares,
And yield my self most wretched.
On my Knees
I beg it might sir, vouchsafe me hearing.
Speak, speak, and I thus low, such is my fortune,
Will hear what thou can say.
Look but on this,
Has not a man that has but means to keep
A Hawk, a Greyhound, and a hunting Nag,
More pleasure then this King?
A dull fool still,
Make me a King, and let me scratch with care,
And see who'l have the better; give me rule,
Command, obedience, pleasure of a King,
And let the devil roar; The greatest corrosive
A King can have, is of more precious tickling,
And handled to the height more dear delight,
Then other men's whole lives, let 'em be safe too.
Think of the mutinous people.
Hang the people,
Give me the pleasure, let me do all, awe all,
Enjoy their wives and states at my discretion,
And peg 'em when I please, let the slaves mumble.
But say they should be vexed, and rise against thee?
Let 'em rise, let 'em rise: give me the bridle here,
And see if they can crack my girths: ah Villio,
Under the Sun, ther's nothing so voluptuous
As riding of this monster, till he founder.
VVho's that so low????
I am dumb: is not this rare?
Kings looks make Pythagoreans; is not this
A happiness Villio?
Yes, to put to silence
A fawning sycophant.
Thou speak truth in all,
And mercy is a vice, when there needs rigour,
Which I with all severity will practise;
And since as subjects they pay not obedience.
They shall be forced as slaves: I will remove
Their means to hurt, and with the means, my fears:
Go you the fatal executioners
Of my commands, and in our name proclaim,
That from this hour I do forbid all meetings,
All private conferences in the City:
To feast a neighbour shall be death; to talk,
As they meet in the streets, to hold discourse,
By writing, nay by signs; see this performed,
And I will call your cruelty, to those
That dare rapine at this, to me true service.
This makes for us.
I now we have employments,
If we grow not rich it were fit we should be beggars.
Ronvere. 
My Lord.
Thou enemy to Majesty?
What think thou of a Kingdom?
As of a man
That hath power to doe ill.
Of a thing rather
That does divide an Empire with the Gods;
Observe but with how little breath he shakes
A populous City, which would stand unmoved
Against a whirlwind.
Then you make him more
Then him that rules the winds.
For me I doe profess it,
Were I offered to be any thing on Earth,
I would be mighty Ferrant.
Ha? who names me?
Deliver thy thoughts slave, thy thoughts, and truly,
Or be no more.
They rather will deserve.
Your favour then your fury; I admire,
(As who does not, that is a loyal subject?)
Your wisdom, power, your perfect happiness,
The most blessed of mankind.
Did thou but feel
The weighty sorrows, that sit on a Crown,
Tho thou should find one in the streets Castruchio,
Thou would not think it worth the taking up;
But since thou art enamoured of my fortune,
Thou shalt ere long taste of it.
But one day,
And then let me expire.
Go to my wardrobe,
And of the richest things I wear, cull out,
What thou think fit: do you attend him sir.
I warrant you, I shall be at his elbow,
The fool will never leave him. 
Made for ever. 
What shout is that? draw up Guards.
Those rather 
Speak joy then danger.
Bring her to my house,
I would not have her seen here.
My Ascanio!
The most desired of all the men, let me die
In these embraces; how were thou redeemed?
Sir, this is my preserver.
At more leisure,
I will inquire the manner, and the means,
I cannot spare so much time now from my
More strict embraces: ??irolet, welcome too,
This service weighs down your intended treason;
You long have bin mine enemy, learn now
To be my friend and loyal, I ask no more,
And live as free as Ferrant; let him have
The forty thousand crowns I gladly promised,
For my Ascanios freedom, and deliver
His Father, and his wife to him in safety,
Something hath passed which I am sorry for,
But twill not now be helped; come my Ascanio,
And reap the harvest of my winter travels. 
My best Ascanio, my most loved Ascanio.
My Lord, all former passages forgot,
I am become a suitor.
To me ??irolet?
To you, yet will not beg the curtsy,
But largely pay you for it.
To the purpose.
The forty thousand crowns the King hath given me,
I will bestow on you, if by your means
I may have liberty for a divorce
Between me and my wife.
Your Julicana?
That for you hath endured so much, so nobly?
The more my sorrow; but it must be so.
I will not hinder it: without a bribe,
For mine own ends, I would have furthered this.
I will use all my power.
It is all I ask:
Oh my cursed fate, that ever man should hate
Himself for being beloved, or be compelled
To cast away a Jewel, Kings would buy,
Tho with the loss of Crown and Monarchy! 
How do I look?
You are so strangely altered,
We scarce can know you, so young again, and utterly
From that you were, figure, or any favour???
Your friends cannot discern you.
I have none,
None but my fair revenge, and let that know me???
You are finely altered too.
To please your humour,
But we may pass without disguise, our living
Was never in their element.
This Jew sure,
That altered you, is a made knave.
O! a most excellent fellow.
How he has mewed your head, has rubbed the show off,
And run your beard into a peak of twenty!
Stopped all the crannies in your face.
Most rarely.
And now you look as plump, your eyes as spark???ling,
As if you were to leap into a Ladies saddle.
Has he not set your nose awry?
The better.
I think it be the better, but tic awry sure;
North and by East. I ther's the point it stands in;
Now half a point to th'Southward.
I could laugh,
But that my business requires no mirth now;
Thou art a merry fellow.
I would the Jew sir,
Could steer my head right, for I have such a swimming in it,
Ever since I went to Sea first.
Take wine and purge it.
I have had a thousand pills of Sack, a thousand;
A thousand pottle pills.
Take more.
Good Doctor, 
Your patient is easily persuaded.
The next fair open weather
Me thinks this Jew,
If he were truly known to foundered Courtiers,
And decayed Ladies, that have lost their fleeces
On every bush, he might pick a pretty living.
The best of all our gallants, now be glad of him;
For if you mark their marches, they are tender,
Soft, soft, and tender; then but observe their bodies,
And you shall find 'em cemented by a Surgeon,
Or some Physician for a year or two,
And then toth'tub again, for a new pickle.
This Jew might live a Gentile here. 
What are these?
Stand close and mark?
These are no men, they are motions.
What sad and ruthful faces!
How they duck!
This senseless, silent curtsy me thinks,
Shows like two Turks, salu???ing one another,
Upon two French porters backs.
They are my Countrymen,
And this, some forced infliction from the tyrant;
What are you? why is this? why move thus silent
As if you were wandering shadows? why so sad?
Your tongues sealed up; are ye of several Countries?
You understand not one another?
That's an English man,
He looks as though he had lost his dog.
Your habits
Show ye all Neapolitanes, and your faces
Deliver you oppressed things: speak boldly:
Do you groan, and labour under this stiff yoke?
They shake their heads and weep.
O misery!
Give plenteous sorrow, and no tongues to show 'em!
This is a studied cruelty.
Be gon sir,
It seems you are a stranger and your self;
You wonder here at us, as much we wonder
To hear you speak so openly, and boldly,
The Kings command being published to the contrary;
Tic death here, above two to talk together;
And that must be but common salutation neither,
Short and so part.
How should a man buy mustard,
If he be forced to stay the making of it?
Clear all the streets before the King:
Get off Sir,
And shift as we must do. 
I'll see his glory.
Stand fast now and like men, 
Begin the game sir, 
And pluck me down, the Row
Of houses there.
They hide the view of the hill; and sink those merchants,
Their ships are foul and stink.
This is a sweet youth.
All that are taken in assemblies,
Their houses and their wives, their wealths are foreit,
Their lives at your devotion. Villains, Knaves,
I'll make you bow &amp; shake, i'll make you kneel Rogues.
How brave tic to be a King?
Here's fine tumbling.
No man shall sit in the temple near another.
Nor lie with his own wife.
All upon pain
Of present death, forget to write.
That's excellent,
Carriers and foot-Posts, will be arrant Rebels.
No Character, or stamp that may deliver
This mans intention, to that man in the Country.
Nay, an you cut off, after my hearty commenda???tions
Your friend and Oliver. No more.
No man smile,
And wear a face of mirth; that fellows coming,
And hides a double heart, he's your prize, smoke him.
What base abuse is this? Ha? tic her face sure,
My prisoners with her too? by heaven wild whore
Now is my time.
Do what you will.
Stay hold yet,
My Country shall be served first, let her go,
We'll have an hour for her to make her tremble.
Now show your selves, and bless you with your valors.
Here's a whole plump of Rogues. 
Now for your Country.
Away with 'em and hang 'em; no, no mercy,
I say no mercy.
Be it so upon 'em.
Treason, treason, treason.
Cut the slaves to giggets.
Down with the bul-beefes.
Hold, hold, I command you???look here
A miserable thing. I am no King sir.
Sir, your fools face has preserved your life.
Wear no more Kings coats, you have escaped a scouring.
I'st not the King.
No, tic a prating Rascal,
The puppy makes him mirth.
Yes sir, I am a puppy.
I beseech you let me hang him,
I'll do it in my belt straight.
As you are honourable,
It is enough you may hang me.
I'll hang a squib it's tail
That shall blow both his buttocks, like a peter.
Do any thing.
But do not kill me Gentlemen. 
Lets flea h???m, and have him fly blown.
Away, and save your lives.
The King himself is conning on??? if you stay,
You are lost for ever; let not so much nobleness
Wilfully perish.
How near?
He's here behind you. 
We thank you. 
Double the Guards and take in men that dare,
These slaves are frighted; where are the proud Rebels,
To what protection fled, what villain leads 'em?
Under our nose disturb our rest?
We shall hear,
For such a search I have sent, to hunt the Traitors.
Yet better men I say, we stand too open:
How now Castruchio? how do you like our glory?
I must confess, it was somewhat more then my match Sir;
This open glory agrees not with my body,
But if it were in the Castle, or some strength,
Where I might have my swing.
You have been swinged brother;
How these delights have tickled you? you itch yet;
Will you walk out again in pomp?
Good Fool.
These rogues must be rebuked, they are too saucy,
These peremptory Knaves. Will you walk out Sir,
And take the remnant of your Coronation?
The people stay to see it.
Do not vex him;
He's grief enough in's bones; you shall to the Citadel,
And like my self command, there use your pleasure,
But take heed to your person.
The more danger;
Still the more honour Brother.
If I reign not then,
And like a King, and thou shalt know it fool,
And thou shalt feel it fool.
Fools still are freemen,
I'll sue for a protection, till thy reigne's out.
The people have abused the liberty
I late allowed, I now proclaim it straighter,
No men shall walk together, nor salute;
For they that doe shall dye.
You hit the right Sir;
That liberty cut off, you are free from practise.
Renew my guards.
I shall.
And keep strict watches;
One hour of joy I ask.
You shall have many. 
You are now at liberty, in your own house Lady,
And here our charge takes end.
It is now a Custom.
We must even woo those men deserve worst of us,
And so we thank your labours; there's to drink,
For that, and mischief are your occupations;
And to mean well to no man, you Chief'st harvests.
You give liberally; we hope Sir, er't be long,
To be oftner acquainted with your bounty,
And so we leave you.
Doe, for I dote not on ye;
But whore's my Husband? what should I do here?
Or what share have I in this joy, called liberty,
Without his company? Why did you flatter me,
And tell me he was returned, his service honoured?
He is so, and stands high in the Kings favour,
His friends redeemd, and his own liberty,
From which yours is derived, confirmed; his service,
To his own wish rewarded: so fare-well Lady. 
Go persecute the good, and hunt ye hell-hounds;
Ye Leeches of the time, suck till ye burst slaves;
How does my girl?
Weak yet, but full of comfort;
Sit down, and take some rest;
My heart's whole Father;
That joys, and leaps, to hear my Virolet,
My Deer, my life, has conquered his afflictions.
Those rude hands, and that bloody will that did this,
That durst upon thy tender body Print
These Characters of cruelty; hear me heaven.
O Sir be sparing.
I'll speak it, tho I burst;
And tho the ayre had ears, and served the Tyrant,
Out it should go: O hear me thou great Justice;
The miseries, that waite upon their mischiefs,
Let them be numberless, and no eye pity
Them when their souls are laden, and in labour,
And wounded through, and through, with guilt &amp; horror,
As mine is now with grief; let men laugh at 'em
Then, when their monstrous sins, like earth-quaks, shake 'em;
And those eyes, that forgot heaven would look upward,
The bloody 'larms, of the conscience beating,
Let mercy fly, and day struck into darkness,
Leave their blind souls, to hunt out their own horrors.
Enough, enough, we must forget dear Father;
For then we are glorious forms of heaven; and live,
When we can suffer, and as soon forgive.
But whore's my Lord? me thinks I have seen this house,
And have been in it before.
Thine own house jewel.
Mine, without him? or his, without my company?
I think it cannot be; it was not wont Father.
Some business with the King (let it be good heaven)
Retains him sure. 
It must be good and noble,
For all men that he treats with taste of virtue;
His words and actions are his own; and Honour's
Not bought, nor compelled from him.
Here's the Boy.
He can confirm us more, how sad the child looks?
Come hither Lucio; how, and whore's thy Master?
Speak gentle Boy.
Is he returned in safety?
If not, and that thou know is miserable,
Our hopes and happiness declined for ever;
Study a sorrow, excellent as thy Master,
Then if thou can live, leave us.
Noble Madam,
My Lord is safe returned, safe to his friends, and fortune,
Safe to his Country, entertained with honour,
Is here within the house.
Doe not mock me.
But such a melancholy hangs on his mind,
And in his eyes inhabit such sad shadows;
But what the cause is???
Go tell him we are here Boy,
There must be no cause now.
Hast thou forgot me?
No, noblest Lady.
Tell him I am here,
Tell him his wife is here, sound my name to him,
And thou shalt see him start; speak Iuliana,
And like the Sun that labours through a tempest,
How suddenly he will disperse his sadness?
Go I command thee instantly,
And charge him on his duty.
On his Love Boy:
I would fine go to him.
Away, away, you are foolish.
Bear all my service sweet Boy.
Art thou here still?
And tell him what thou wilt that shall become thee.
In the house; and know we are here. 
No, no, he did not;
I warrant you he did not: could you think
His Love had less then wings, had he but seen me;
His strong affection any thing but fire
Consuming all weak lets, and rubs before it,
Till he had met my flame, and made one body?
If ever heavens high blessings met in one man,
And there erected to their holy uses???
A sacred mind, fit for their services,
Built all of polished honour, it was in this man:
Misdoubt him not.
I know he's truly noble;
But why this sadness, when the general cause
Requires a Jubilee of joy?
I know not. 
Pray heaven you find it not.
I hope I shall not:
O here he comes, and with him all my happiness;
He stays and thinks, we may be too unmannerly;
Pray give him leave. 
I doe not like this sadness.
O hard condition of my misery!
Unheard of plagues! when to behold that woman,
That chaste and virtuous woman, that preserved me,
That pious wife, wedded to my afflictions,
Must be more terrible then all my dangers.
O fortune, thou hast robed men of my making,
The noble building of a man, demolished,
And flung me headlong, on a sin so base
Man and mankind contemn; even beasts abhor it,
A sin more dull then drink, a shame beyond it;
So foul, and far from faith; I dare not name it,
But it will cry it self out, loud ingratitude.
Your blessing Sir.
You have it in abundance;
So is our joy, to see you safe.
My Dear one;
He has not forgot me yet: O take me to you Sir.
Must this be added to increase my misery,
That she must weep for joy, and loose that goodness?
My Iuliana, even the best of women,
Of wives the perfectest, let me speak this,
And with a modesty declare thy virtues,
Chaster then Crystal, on the Scythian Clefts
The more the proud winds Court, the more the purer.
Sweeter in thy obedience, then a sacrifice;
And in thy mind a Saint, that even yet living,
Producest miracles, and women daily
With crooked and tame souls creep to thy goodness,
Which having touched at, they become examples.
The fortitude of all their sex, is Fable
Compared to thine; and they that filled up glory,
And admiration, in the age behind us,
Out of their celebrated urns, are started,
To stare upon the greatness of thy spirit;
Wondering what new Martyr heaven has begot,
To fill the times with truth, and ease their stories:
Being all these, and excellent in beauty,
(For noble things dwell in the noblest buildings)
Thou hast undone thy husband, made him wretch'ed,
A miserable man, my Juliana,
Thou hast made thy ??irolet.
Now goodness keep me;
Oh! my dear Lord.
She wrong you? what's the meaning?
Weep not, but speak, I charge you on obedience;
Your Father charges you; she make you miserable?
That you your self confess.
I doe, that kills me;
And far less I have spoke her??? then her merit.
It is some sin of weakness, or of Ignorance?
For sure my Will???
No, it is a sin of excellence:
Forgive me heaven, that I profane thy blessings:
Sit still; I'll show you all. 
What means this madness?
For sure there is no taste of right man in it;
Grieves he our liberty, our preservation?
Or has the greatness of the deed he has done,
Made him forget, for whom, and how he did it,
And looking down upon us, scorn the benefit?
Well ??irolet if thou be proud, or treacherous
He cannot Sir, he cannot; he will show us,
And with that reason ground his words.
He comes. 
What Masque is this? what admirable beauty?
Pray heaven his heart be true.
A goodly woman.
Tell me my Dear; and tell me without flattery,
As you are nobly honest, speak the truth;
What think you of this Lady?
She is most excellent.
Might not this beauty tell me that it's a sweet one,
Without more setting off, as now it is,
Thanking no greater Mistress then mere nature?
Stagger a constant heart?
She is full of wonder;
But yet; yet ??irolet.
Pray; by your leave Sir.
She would amaze:
O! would she so? I thank you;
Say to this beauty, she have all additions,
Wealth, noble birth.
O hold there.
All virtues,
A mind, as full of Candor as the truth is,
I, and a loving Lady.
She must needs
(I am bound in conscience to confess) deserve much.
Nay, say beyond all these, she be so pious,
That even on slaves condemned she shower her benefits,
And melt their stubborn Bolts with her soft pity,
What think you then?
For such a noble office,
At these years, I should dote my self; take heed Boy,
If you be he, that have received these blessings,
And this the Lady: love her, honour her;
You cannot doe too much, to show your gratitude,
Your greatest service will show off too slender.
This is the Lady; Lady of that bounty,
That wealth, that noble name, that all I spoke of:
The Prince Ascaino and my self, the slaves
Redeemed, brought home, still guarded by her goodness,
And of our liberties you taste the sweetness;
Even you she has preserved too, lengthened your lives.
And what reward doe you purpose? it must be a maine one;
If love will do it we'll all, so love her, serve her.
It must be my love.
Ha!
Mine, my only love,
My everlasting love:
How?
Pray have patience.
The recompense she asked, and I have rendered.
Was to become her husband: then I vowed it,
And since I have made it good.
Thou durst not.
Done Sir.
Be what you please, his happiness yet stays with me,
You have been mine; Oh my unhappy fortune.
Nay, break and dye;
It cannot yet: I must live,
Till I see this man, blessed in his new love,
And then:
What hast thou done? thou base one tell me,
Thou barren thing of honesty, and honour;
What hast thou wrought? Is not this she, look on her,
Look on her, with the eyes of gratitude,
And whip thy false tears off; Is not this she,
That three times on the Rack, to guard thy safety,
When thou stood'st lost, and naked to the Tyrant;
Thy aged Father here, that shames to know thee Tyrant,
Engaged in the jaws of danger; was not this she,
That then gave up her body to the torture?
That tender body, that the wind sings through;
And three times, when her sinews, cracked &amp; torter'd,
The beauties of her body turned to ruins,
Even then, within her patient heart, she locked thee;
Then hid thee from the Tyrant; then preserved thee;
And can thou be that slave?
This was but duty;
She did it for her Husband, and she ought it;
She has had the pleasure of him, many an hour;
And if one minutes pain cannot be suffered;
Mine was above all these, a nobler venture,
I speak it boldly, for I lost a Father.
He has one still; I left my friends, he has many;
Exposed my life, and honour to a cruelty,
That if it had seized on me, racks and tortures,
Alas, they are Triumphs to it: and had it hit,
For this mans love, it should have showed a triumph,
Twice lost, I freed him; Rossana lost before him,
His fortunes with him; and his friends behind him:
Twice was I racked my self for his deliverance,
In honour first and name, which was a torture
The Hang-man never heard of; next at Sea,
In our escape, where the proud waves took pleasure
To toss my little Boat up like a Bubble,
Then like meteor in the ayre he hung,
Then caught, and hug him in the depth of darkness;
The Canon from my incensed Fathers Ship,
Ringing our Knell, and still as we peeped upward,
Beating the raging surge, with fire and Bullet,
And I stood fixed for this mans sake, and scorned it;
Compare but this:
It is too true; O my fortune!
That I must equally be bound to either:
You have the better, and the nobler Lady;
And now I am forced, a lover of her goodness.
And so far have you wrought for his deliverance,
That is my Lord, so lovingly and nobly,
That now me thinks I stagger in my Title.
But how with honesty? for I am poor Lady,
In all my duteous service but your shadow,
Yet would be just; how with fair fame and credit,
I may go off; I would not be a strumpet:
O my dear Sir you know:
O truth, thou know too.
Nor have the world suspect, I fell to mischief.
Take you no care for that, here's that has don it;
A fair divorce, it is honest too.
The devil,
Honest? to put her off.
Most honest Sir,
And in this point, most strong.
The cause, the cause Sir?
A just cause too.
As any is in hell, Lawyer.
For barrenness, she never brought him children.
Why art not thou divorced? thou can not get 'em;
Thy neigbours, thy rank neighbours: O base juggling,
Is she not young?
Women at more years Sir,
Have met that blessing??? it is in heavens high power.
You never can have any:
Why quick Lawyer?
My Philosophical Lawyer.
The Rack has spoiled her
The distentions of those parts, hath stopped all fruitfulness.
O I could curse.
And am I grown so miserable,
That mine own pity must make me wretched?
No cause against me, but my love and duty?
Farewell Sir??? like obedience, thus I leave you,
My long farewell: I doe not grudge, I grieve Sir,
And if that be offensive, I can dye,
And then you fairly free: good Lady love him;
You have a noble, and an honest Gentleman,
I ever found him so, the world has spoke him;
And let it be your part still to deserve him:
Love him no less then I have done; and serve him,
And heaven shall bless you; you shall bless my ashes;
I give you up the house; the name of wife,
Honour, and all respect I borrowed from him,
And to my grave I turn: one farewell more;
Nothing divide your Loves, not want of Children,
Which I shall pray against, and make you fruitful;
Grow like two equal flames, rise high and glorious;
And in your honoured age, burn out together:
To all I know, farewell.
Be not so grie'vd Lady;
A nobler fortune.
Away thou parasite.
Disturb not my sad thoughts; I hate thy greatness.
I hate not you; I am glad she's off these hinges,
Come, let's pursue. 
If I had breath to curse thee;
Or could my great heart utter; farewell villain,
Thy house, nor face again. 
Let 'em all go.
And now let us rejoice; now freely take me,
And now embrace me Virolet; give the rites
Of a brave Husband to his love.
I'll take my leave too.
How, take you leave too?
The house is furnished for you;
You are Mistress, may command.
Will you to bed Sir?
As soon to hell, to any thing I hate most;
You must excuse me, I have kept my word.
You are my wife, you now enjoy my fortune,
Which I have done to recompense your bounty:
But to yield up those chaste delights and pleasures,
Which are not mine, but my first vows.
You jest.
You will not find it so, to give you those;
I have divorced, and lost with Iuliana,
And all fires of that nature.
Are you a Husband;
To question hers, and satisfy your flames,
That held an equal beauty, equal bounty.
Good heaven forgive; no, no, the strict for???bearance,
Of all those joys, like a full sacrifice,
I offer to the sufferings of my first love;
Honour, and wealth, attendance, state, all duty,
Shall waite upon your will, to make you happy;
But my afflicted mind, you must give leave Lady;
My weary Trunk must wander.
Not enjoy me?
Go from me too?
For ever thus I leave you;
And how so ever I fare, live you still happy. 
Since I am scorned, I'll hate thee, scorn thy gifts too;
Thou miserable fool, thou fool to pity;
And such a rude, demolished thing, I'll leave thee,
In my revenge: for foolish love, farewell now,
And anger, and the spite of woman enter,
That all the world shall say, that read this story,
My hate, and not my love, begot my glory.
He that fears death, or tortures, let him leave me.
The stops that we have met with, Crown our Conquest:
Common attempts are fit for common men;
The rare, the rarest spirits. Can we be daunted?
We that have smiled at Sea at certain ruins,
Which men on shore; but hazarded would shake at
We that have lived free, in despite of fortune,
Laughed at the out-stretch'd Arm of Tyranny,
As still too short to reach us, shall we faint now?
No my bravemates, I know your fiery temper,
And that you can, and dare, as much as men:
Calamity, that severs worldly friendships,
Could ne'er divide us, you are still the same;
The constant followers of my banished fortunes;
The Instruments of my revenge; the hands
By which I work, and fashion all my projects.
And such we will be ever.
'Slite Sir, Cram me
Into a Canons mouth, and shoot me at
Proud Ferrands head; may only he fall with me,
My life I rate at nothing.
Could I but get,
Within my swords length of him; and if then
He scope me, may th'account of all his diinnes
Be added unto mine.
It is not to dye Sir,
But to dye unrevenged, that staggers me:
For were your ends served, and our Country free,
We would fall willing sacrifices.
To rise up,
Most glorious Martyrs.
But the reason why
We wear these shapes?
Only to get access:
Like honest men, we never shall approach him,
Such are his fears, but thus attired like Switzers,
And fashioning our language to our habits;
Bold, bloody, desperate, we may be admitted
Among his guard. But if this fail, I'll try
A thousand others, out doe Proteus
In various shapes, but I will reach his heart.
And seal my anger on it. 
The Lord Ronero.
Shall we begin with him?
He is not ripe yet,
Nor fit to fall: as you see me begin,
Withal care imitate.
We are instructed.
Would we were at it once.
Keep a strict watch,
And let the guards be doubled, this last night
The King had fearful dreams.
It is a good Omen
To our attempts.
What men are these? What seek you?
Employment.
Of what nature?
We are Soldiers;
We have seen towns and Churches set on fire;
The Kennels running blood, coy virgins ravished;
The Altars ransacked, and the holy relics,
Yea, and the Saints themselves, made lawful spoils,
Unto the Conquerors: but these good days are past,
And we made Beggars, by this Idle Peace,
For want of action. I am Sir no stranger
To the Government of this state, I know the King
Needs men, that only doe what he commands,
And search no further: it is the profession
Of all our Nation, to serve faitnfully,
Where they are best payed: and if you entertain us,
I doe not know the thing you can command,
Which we will not put in act.
A goodly Parsonage.
And if you have an Enemy, or so
That you would have dispatched.
They are here, can fit you.
Or if there be an Itch, though to a man,
You shall tie
Our consciences in your purse-strings.
Gentlemen,
I like your freedom: I am now in haste,
But waite for my return. I like the Rascals,
They may be useful.
We will attend you Sir:
Doe; and be confident, of entertainment;
I hope ye will deserve it. 
O, no doubt Sir:
Thus far we are prosperous; we will be his guard,
Till Tyranny and pride find full reward: 
My blessing? no; a Fathers heavy curse,
Pursue, and overtake him.
Gentle Sir.
My name, and Family; end in my self
Rather then live in him.
Dear Sir forbear,
A fathers curses, hit far off, and kill too.
And like a murthering-piece aims not at one,
But all that stand within the dangerous level.
Some bullet may return upon your self too,
Though against nature, if you still go on
In this unnatural course.
Thou art not made
Of that same stuff as other women are:
Thy injuries would teach patience to blaspheme;
Yet still thou art a Dove.
I know not malice, but like an innocent, suffer.
More miraculous!
He have a woman Chronicled, and for goodness,
Which is the greatest wonder. Let me see,
I have no son to inherit after me;
Him I disclaim.
What then? He make thy virtues my sole heir;
Thy story Isle have written, and in Gold to;
In prose and verse, and by the ablest doers:
A word or two of a kind step-father
He have put in, good Kings and Queens shall buy it.
And if the actions of ill great women,
And of the modern times too, are remembered,
That have undone their husbands, and their families,
What will our story do? It shall be so,
And I will straight about it. 
Such as love
Goodness for glory, have it for reward;
I love mine for it self: let innocence
Be written on my Tomb, though ne'er so humble,
Tic all I am ambitious of. But I
Forget my vows.
Before me, you are not modest,
Nor is this Courtlike. Would you take it well,
If she should rudely press into your Clolst,
When from your several Boxes you choose paint,
To make a this days face with?
What's the matter?
Pray know her pleasure first.
To whom speak you Boy?
Your Ladyships pardon. That proud Lady theife,
That stole away my Lord from your embraces,
(Wrinckes at two and twenty on her cheeks for it,
Or Mercury unallayed, make blisters on it)
Would force a visit.
And dare you deny her,
Or any else that I call mine? No more,
Attend her with all reverence and respect;
The want in you of manners, my Lord may
Construe in me for malice. I will teach you
How to esteem and love the beauty he dotes on;
Prepare a banquet. 
Madam, thus my duty
Stoops to the favour you vouchsafe your servant,
In honouring her house.
Is this in scorn?
No by the life of Virolet: give me leave
To swear by him, as by a Saint I worship,
But am to know no further, my heart speaks that
My servants have been rude, and this boy (doting
Upon my sorrows) hath forgot his duty:
In which, that you may think I have no share,
Sir, upon your knees, desire her pardon.
I dare not disobey you.
Prithee rise,
My anger never looks so low: I thank you.
And will deserve it, If we may be private,
I came to see and speak with you.
Be gone. 
Good Madam sit.
I rob you of your place then.
You have deserved a better, in my bed;
Make use of this too: Now your pleasure Lady.
If in your breaard there be a worthy pity,
That brings you for my comfort, you do nobly:
But if you come to triumph in your conquest,
Or tread on my calamities, 'twil wrong
Your other excellencies. Let it suffice,
That you alone enjoy the best of men,
And that I am forsaken.
He the best?
The scum and shame of mankind.
Virolet, Lady?
Blessed in him? I would my youth had chosen
Consuming fevers, bed-rid age
For my companions, rather then a thing
To lay whose baseness open, would even poison
The tongue that speaks it.
Certainly from you
At no part he deserves this; and I tell you,
Durst I pretend but the least title to him,
I should not hear this.
He's an impudent villain,
Or a malicious wretch: to you ungrateful;
To me, beyond expression barbarous.
I more then hate him; from you, he deserves
A death most horrid: from me, to die for ever,
And know no end of torments. Would you have comfort?
Would you wash off the stain that sticks upon you,
In being refused? Would you redeem your fame,
Shipwrecked in his base wrongs? if you desire this,
It is not to be done with slavish suffering,
But by a Noble anger, making way
To a most brave revenge, we may call justice;
Our injuries are equal; join with me then,
And share the honour.
I scarce understand you,
And know I shall be most unapt to learn
To hate the man I still must love and honour.
This foolish dotage in soft-hearted women,
Makes proud men insolent: but take your way,
Isle run another course.
As you are noble,
Deliver his offence.
He has denied
The rites due to a wife.
O me most happy,
How largely am I paid for all my sufferings?
Most honest Virolet, thou just performer
Of all thy promises: I call to mind now,
When I was happy in those joys you speak of,
In a chaste bed, and warranted by Law too,
He oft would swear, that if he should survive me,
(Which then I knew he wished not) never woman
Should taste of his embraces; this one act
Makes me again his debtor.
And was this
The cause my youth and beauty were contemned?
If I sit down here! well ???;
I date thy worst,
Plot what thou can, my piety shall guard him
Against thy malice. Leave my house and quickly,
Thou wilt infect these innocent walls. By virtue
I will inform him of thy bloody purpose,
And turn it on thine own accursed head;
Believ't I will. 
But tic not in thy power
To hinder what I have decreed against him.
He set my self to sale, and live a strumpet;
Forget my birth, my father, and his honour,
Rather then want an instrument to help me 
In my revenge. The Captain of the guard;
Blessed opportunity courts me.
Sad and troubled?
How brave her anger shows? how it sets off
Her natural beauty? under what happy star
Was Virolet born, to be beloved and sought to,
By two incomparable women? Noblest Lady,
I have heard your wrongs and pity them: and if
The service of my life could give me hope
To gain your favour, I should be most proud
To be commanded.
Tic in you, my Lord,
To make me your glad servant.
Name the means.
Tic not preferment, Jewels, Gold, or Courtship.
He that desires to reap the harvest of
My youth and beauty, must begin in blood,
And right my wrongs.
I apprehend you Madam,
And rest assured tic done; I am provided
Of instruments to fit you: To the King,
Isle instantly present you; if I fail,
He shall make good your aims: he's less then man,
That to achieve your favour, would not doe
Deeds, friends would fear to put their agents to. 
Quid invitus facis, non est scelus. Tic an axiom,
Now whether willingly I have departed
With that I loved: with that, above her life
Loved me again, crowned me a happy husband,
Was full of children: her afflictions
That I begot, that when our age must perish,
And all our painted frailties turn to ashes,
Then shall they stand and propagate our honours.
Whether this done, and taking to protection
A new stange beauty, it was a useful one:
How to my lust? if it be so, I am sinful;
And guilty of that crime I would fling from me.
Was there not in it this fair course of virtue?
This pious course, to save my friends, my Country,
That even then had put on a mourning garment,
And wept the desolation of her children?
Her noblest children? Did not she thrust me on,
And to my duty clapped the spur of honour?
Was there a way, without this woman, left me
To bring 'em off? the marrying of this woman?
If not, why am I stung thus? why tormented?
Or had there been a wild desire joined with it,
How easily, both these, and all their beauties
Might I have made mine own? why am I touched thus,
Having performed the great redemption,
Both of my friends and family? fairly done it?
Without base and lascivious ends O Heaven,
Why am I still at war thus? why this a mischief,
That honesty and honour had propounded,
I, and absolved my tender will, and chid me,
Nay then unwillingly flung me on.
He's here Madam;
This is the melancholy walk he lives in,
And chooses ever to increase his sadness.
Stand by.
Tic she: how I shake now and tremble?
The virtues of that mind are torments to me.
Sir, if my hated face shall stir your anger,
Or this forbidden path I tread in vex you;
My love, and fair obedience let behind me,
Your pardon asked, I shall return and bless you.
Pray stay a little, I delight to see you;
May not we yet, though fortune have divided us,
Ana set an envious stop between our pleasures,
Look thus one at another? sigh and weep thus?
And read in one another eyes, the Legends,
And wonders of our old loves? be not fearful,
Though you be now a Saint, I may adore you:
May I not take this hand, and on it sacrifice
The sorrows of my heart? white seal of virtue.
My Lord, you wrong your wedlock.
Were she here,
And with her all severe eyes to behold us,
We might do this; I might name Julian,
And to the reverence of that name, bow thus:
I might sigh Juliana, she was mine once;
But I too weak a guard for that great Treasure???
And whilst she has a name, believe me Lady,
This broken heart shall never want a sorroW.
Forget her sir, your honour now commands you
You are another, keep those griefs for her,
She richly can reward 'em. I would have spoken with you
What is your will? for nothing you can ask,
So full of goodness are your words and meanings,
Must be denied: speak boldly.
I thank you sir. I come not
To beg, or flatter, only to be believed,
That I desire: for I shall tell a story,
So far from seeming truth, yet a most true one;
So horrible in nature, and so horrid;
So beyond wickedness, that when you hear it,
It must appear the practice of another,
The cast &amp; malice of some one you have wronged much;
And me, you may imagine me accused to,
Unless you call to mind my daily sufferings;
The infinite obedience I have born you,
That hates all name and nature of revenge.
My love, that nothing but my death can sever,
Rather then hers I speak of.
Juliana,
To make a doubt of what you shall deliver,
After my full experience of your virtues,
Were to distrust a providence; to think you can lie,
Or being wronged, seek after foul repairings,
To forge a Creed against my faith.
I must do so, for it concerns your life sir;
And if that word may stir you, hear and prosper:
I should be dumb else, were not you at stake here.
What new friend have I found, that dares deliver
This laden Trunk from his afflictions?
What pitying hand, of all that feels my miseries,
Brings such a benefit?
Be wise and manly,
And with your honour fall, when Heaven shall call you,
Not by a Hellish mischief.
Speak my blessed one,
How weak and poor I am, now she is from me?
Your wife.
How's that?
Your wife.
Be tender of her, I shall believe else ???
I must be true: your ear, sir;
For tic so horrible, if the ayre catch it,
Into a thousand plagues, a thousand monsters,
It will disperse it self, and fright resistance,
She seek my life with you? make you her agent?
Another love? O speak but truth.
Be patient,
Dear as I love you, else I leave you wretched.
Forward, tic well, it shall be welcome to me;
I have lived too long, numbered too many days,
Yet never found the benefit of living;
Now when I come to reap it with my service,
And hunt for that my youth and honour aims at,
The Sun sets on my fortune red and bloody,
And everlasting night begins to close me,
Tic time to die. 
She comes her self.
Believe Lady,
And on this Angel hand, your servant seals it,
You shall be Mistress of your whole desires,
And what ye shall command.
Ha minion,
My precious dame, are you there? nay go forward,
Make your complaints, and pour out your faind pities,
Slave, like to him you serve: I am the same still,
And what I purpose, let the world take witness,
Shall be so finished, and to such example,
Spite of your poor preventions; my dear Gentleman,
My honourable man, are you there too?
You and your hot desire? Your mercy sir,
I had forgot your greatness.
Tic not well Lady.
Lord, how I hate this fellow now; how despe???rately
My stomach stands against him, this base fellow,
This gelded fool!
Did you never hear of modesty?
Yes, when I heard of you and so believed it,
Thou bloodless, brainless fool.
How?
Thou despised fool,
Thou only sign of man, how I contemn thee!
Thou woven worthy in a piece of Arras,
Fit only to enjoy a wall; thou beast
Beaten to use; Have I preserved a beauty,
A youth, a love, to have my wishes blasted?
My dotings, and the joys I came to offer,
Must they be lost, and slighted by a dormouse?
Use more respect; and woman, twill become you;
At least, less tongue.
He use all violence,
Let him look for it.
Dare you stain those beauties,
Those Heavenly stamps, that raise men up to wonder,
With harsh and crooked motions? are you she
That overdid all ages, with your honour;
And in a little hour dare lose this triumph?
Is not this man your husband?
He's my halter;
Which (having sued my pardon) I fling off thus,
And with him all I brought him, but my anger;
Which I will nourish to the desolation,
Not only of his folly, but his friends,
And his whole name.
Tic well, I have deserved it.
And if I were a woman, I would rail too.
Nature ne'er promised thee a thing so Noble.
Take back your love, your vow, I give it freely;
I poorly scorn it; graze now where you please:
That that the dullness of thy soul neglected,
Kings sue for now. And mark me, Virolet;
Thou image of a man, observe my words well.
At sucn a bloody rate Isle sell this beauty,
This handsomeness thou scornst, and flingst away,
Thy proud ungrateful life shall shake at: take your house;
The petty things you left me give another;
And last, take home your trinket: fare you well, sir.
You have spoke like your self;
You're a brave Lady. 
Why do you smile, sir?
O my Juliana,
The happiness this women's scorn has given me,
Makes me a man again; proclaims it self,
In such a general joy, through all my miseries,
That now methinks ???
Look to your self dear sir,
And trifle not with danger, that attends you;
Be joyful when you're free.
Did you not hear lier?
She gave me back my vow, my love, my freedom;
I am free, free as air; and though to morrow
Her bloody will meet with my life, and sink it,
And in her execution tear me piecemeal:
Yet have I time once more to meet my wishes,
Once more to embrace my best, my noblest, truest,
And time that's warranted.
Good sir, forbear it:
Though I confess, equal with your desires
My wishes rise, as covetous of your love,
And to as warm alarams spur my will to:
Yet pardon me, the Seal oth'Church dividing us,
And hanging like a threatening flame between us;
We must not meet, I dare not.
That poor disjointing
That only strong necessity thrust on you,
Not crime, nor studied cause of mine: how sweetly,
And nobly I will bind again and cherish;
How I will recompense one dear embrace now,
One free affection! how I burn to meet it??
Look now upon me.
I behold you willingly,
And willingly would yield, but for my credit.
The love you first had was preserved with honour,
The last shall not cry whore; you shall not purchase
From me a pleasure, that have equally
Loved your fair fame as you, at such a rate:
Your honesty and virtue must be banquerout,
If I had loved your lust, and not your lustre;
The glorious lustre of your matchless goodness,
I would compel you now to be! ??? forgive me,
Forgive me sir; how fondly still I love you!
Yet Nobly too; make the way straight before me,
And let but holy Hymen once more guide me,
Under the Ax, upon Rack again,
Even in the bed of all afflictions,
Where nothing sings our Nuptials but dire sorrows,
With all my youth and pleasure Isle embrace you,
Make tyranny and death stand still affrighted,
And at our meeting fowls amaze our mischiefs;
Till when, high Heaven defend you, and peace guide you.
Be wise and manly, make your fate your own,
By being master of a providence,
That may control it.
Stay a little with me,
My thoughts have chid themselves: may I not kiss you?
Upon my truth I am honest.
I believe ye;
But yet what that may raise in both our fancies,
What issues such warm parents breed.
I obey you,
And take my leave as from the Saint that keeps me.
I will be right again, and once more happy
In thy unimitable love.
Isle pray for ye,
And when you fall I have not long to follow. 
Now we have got free credit with the Captain.
Soft, soft, he's here again: Is not that Lady ???
Or have I lost mine eyes? a salt rheum seizes 'em;
But I should know that face.
Make him not madder,
Let him forget the woman; steer a lar board.
He will not kill her.
Any thing he meets;
He's like a Hornet now, he hums, and buzzes;
Nothing but blood and horror.
I would save the Lady,
For such another Lady.
There's the point;
And you know there want women of her mettle.
Tic true, they bring such children now,
Such demilances,
Their fathers socks will make them Christening clothes.
No more, they view us.
You shall play a while,
And sun your self in this felicity,
You shall you glorious whore; I know you still.
But I shall pick an hour when most securely ???
I say no more.
Do you see those? those are they
Shall act your will; come hither my good fellows:
You are now the Kings. Are they not goodly fellows?
They have bone enough, if they have stout heart to it.
Still the old wench.
Pray Captain, let me ask you
What Noble Lady's that? tic a rude question,
But I desire to know.
She is for the King, sir;
Let that suffice for answer.
Is she so sir?
In good time may she curse it.
Must I breed hackneys for his grace?
What would thou do
To merit such a Ladies favour?
Any thing.
That can supply thy wants, and raise thy fortuns?
Let her command, and see what I dare execute.
I keep my conscience here; if any man
Oppose her will, and she would have him humbled,
Whole families between her and her wishes ???
We have seen bleeding throats sir, Cities sacked,
And infants stuck upon their Pikes.
Houses a fire, and handsome mothers weeping.
Which we have heaped upon the pile like sacrifices.
Churches and Altars, Priests and all devotions,
Tumbled together into one rude Chaos.
We know no fear sir, but want of employment.
Nor other faith but what our purses preach.
To gain our ends we can do any thing,
And turn our souls into a thousand figures;
But when we come to do ???
I like these fellows.
Be ready and waite here within this hour
Isle show you to the King, and he shall like ye:
And if you can devise some entertainment
To fill his mirth, such as your Country uses,
Present it, and Isle see it graced.
After this Comic Scene we shall employ you,
For one must die.
What is he sir? speak boldly,
For we dare boldly do.
This Ladies husband;
His name is Virolet.
We shall dispatch it. 
O damned, damned thing: a base whore first,
And then a murderer; Isle look to you.
Can she be grown so strange?
She has an itch;
Isle scratch you my dear daughter, Isle so claw you;
Isle curry your hot hide; married and honoured?
And turn those holy blessings into brothels?
Your beauty into blood? Isle hunt your hotness.
Isle hunt you like a train.
We did all pity her.
Hang her, she is not worth mans memory;
She's false and base, and let her fright all stories.
Well, though thou be mine enemy, Isle right thee,
And right thee Nobly.
Faith sir, since she must go,
Let's spare as few as may be.
We will take all,
And like a torrent sweep the slaves before us.
You dare endure the worst?
You know our hearts sir,
And they shall bleed the last, erst we start from ye.
We can but die, and ere we come to that,
We shall pick out some few examples for us.
Then wait the first occasion, and like Curtius,
Isle leap the gulf before you, fearless leap it:
Then follow me like men, and if our virtues
May boy our Country up, and set her shining
In her first state; our fair revenges taken,
We have our Noble ends, or else our ashes. 
As you are Noble, keep me from discovery,
And let me only run a strangers fortune;
For when the King shall find I am his daughter
He ever holds most ominous, and hates most:
With what eyes can he look, how entertain me,
But with his fears and cruelties?
I have found you,
Suspect not. I am bound to what you like best,
What you intend. I dare not be so curious
To question now; and what you are, lies hid here.
The King comes, make your fortune, I shall joy in it.
All things are ready sir to make you merry,
And such a King you shall behold him now.
I long for it,
For I have need of mirth.
The Lady sir.
Now as I am a King, a sprightly beauty,
A goodly sweet aspect! my thanks Ronvere,
My best thanks; on your lips I seal your wishes,
Be what you can; imagine mine, and happy.
And now sit down and smile; come my Ascanio;
And let this Monarch enter. 
These are the Switzers.
I told your grace of.
Goodly promising fellows,
With faces to keep fools in awe, I like 'em;
Go guard the presence well, and doe your duties,
To morrow I shall take a further view:
You shall Sir,
Or I shall loose my will; how the whore's mounted?
How she sits throned? thou blazing muddy meteor,
That frightest the underworld, with lustful flashes,
How I shall dash thy flames? away, no word more:
Now, here he comes in glory, be merry Masters, meat conveyed away.
A Banquet too?
O, he must sit in State Sir!
How rarely he is ushered? can he think now
He is a King indeed?
Mark but his countenance.
Let me have pleasures infinite, and to the height,
And women in abundance, many women, 
I will disport my grace,
Stand there and long for me.
What have ye brought me here? is this a Feast
Fit for a Prince? a mighty Prince? are these things,
These preparations, ha?
May it please your grace?
It does not please my grace: where are the Marchpanes,
The Custards double royal, and the subtleties?
Why, what weak things are you to serve a Prince thus?
Where be the delicates of the earth and ayre?
The hidden secrets of the Sea? am I a Ploughmen,
You pop me up with porridge? hang the Cooks.
O most Kingly:
What a majestique anger.
Give me some wine.
He cools again now.
Fool, where are my Players?
Let me have all in pomp; let 'em play some love matter,
To make the Ladies itch, I'll be with you anon Ladies;
You black eyes, I'll be with you
Give me some wine I say,
And let me have a Masque of Cuckolds enter:
Of mine own Cuckolds,
And let 'em come in, peeping and rejoicing.
Just as I kiss their wives, and somewhat glorying.
Some wine I say, then for an excellent night-peece,
To show my glory to my loves, and minions:
I will have some great Castle burnt.
Hark you brother:
If that be to please these Ladies, ten to one
The fire first takes upon your own, look to that;
Then you may show a night piece.
Whore's this wine?
Why shall I choke? doe ye long all to be tortured?
Here Sir.
Why, what is this? why Doctor,
Wine and water Sir.
It is Sovereign for your heat, you must endure it.
Most excellent to cool your nigh-peece Sir.
You are of a high and choleric complexion,
And you must have allayes.
Shall I have no sheer wine then?
Not for a world: I tender your dear life Sir;
And he is no faithful Subject???
No, by no means:
Of this you may drink; and never hang, nor quarter,
Nor never whip the fool, this liquors merciful.
I will sit down and eat then: Kings when they are hungry,
May eat I hope.
Yes, but they eat discreetly.
Come, taste this dish, and cut me liberally;
I like sauce well.
Fie it is too hot Sir:
Too deeply seasoned with the spice, away with 't,
You must acquaint your stomach wih those diets
Are temperately nourishing.
But pray stay Doctor,
And let me have my meat again.
By no means:
I have a charge concerns my life.
No meat neither;
Doe Kings never eat Doctor?
Very little Sir.
And that too very choice.
Your King never sleeps Brother,
He must not sleep, his cares still keep him waking.
Now he that eats and drinks much, is a dormouse;
The third part of a wafer, is a weeks diet.
Appoint me something then.
There.
This I feel good,
But it melts too suddenly; yet, how, that gone too! take away.
Ye are not mad! I charge you:
For your health Sir,
A little quickens nature, much depresses.
Eat nothing for my health? that's a new diet;
Let me have something, something has some savour.
Why thou uncourteous Doctor, shall I hang thee?
It is better Sir, then I should let you surfeit;
My death were nothing.
To loose a King, were terrible.
Nay, then I'll carve my self, I'll stay no ceremonies.
This is a Partridge Pie, I am sure that's nourishing,
Or Galen is an Ass: it is rarely seasoned:
Ha Doctor have I hit right? a mark, a mark there?
What ails thy grace?
Retrive those Partridges.
Or as I am a King???
Pray Sir be patient,
They are flown too far.
These are breathed pies an't please you,
And your hawks are such Buzzards.
A King and have nothing.
Nor can have nothing!
What think you of pudding?
A pudding Royal?
To be royally starved,
Whip me this fool to death; he is a blockhead.
Let 'em think they whip me, as we think you a King:
Twill be enough.
As for you dainty Doctor, the Table taken away,
All gone, all snatched away, and I unsatsfied,
Without my wits being a King and hungry?
Suffer but this thy treason? I tell thee Doctor,
I tell it thee, in earnest, and in anger,
I am damnably hungry, my very grace is hungry.
A hungry grace is fittest to no meal Sir.
Some two hours hence, you shall see more: but still Sir,
You must retain a strict and excellent diet.
It sharpens you, and makes your wit so poignant,
Your very words will kill.
A bit of Marmalade
No bigger then a Peas.
And that well buttered,
The ayre thrice purified, and three times spirited,
Becomes a King: your rare conserve of nothing
Breeds no offence.
Am I turned King Chameleon,
And keep my Court in the air?
They vex him cruelly.
In two days more they'll starve him.
Now the women, there's no food left but they.
They'll prove small nourishment.
Yet he has another stomach and a great one,
I see by his eye.
I'll have mine own power here;
Mine own Authority; I need no tutor.
Doctor this is no diet.
It may be Sir
Byr'lady, it may turn to a dry diet;
And how thy grace, will ward that???
Stand off Doctor;
And talk to those that want faith,
Hot and mighty.
He will cool apace, no doubt.
Fair, plump, and red,
A forehead high; an eye revives the dead;
A lip like ripest fruit, inviting still.
But O, the rushy well, below the hill,
Take heed of that, for though it never fail
Take heed I say, for thereby hangs a tail.
I'll get ye all with Child.
With one Child Brother,
So many men in a Blew Coat.
Had I fed well.
And drank good store of wine, ye had been blessed all,
Blessed all with double Births; come kiss me greedily,
And think no more upon your foolish Husbands,
They are transitory things: a Kings fame meets you,
Vanish away. 
How, they gone too? my guard there:
Take me this devil Doctor, and that fool there,
And sow 'em in a sack; bring back the women,
The lovely women, drown these rogues or hang 'em.
He is in earnest Sir.
In serious earnest, 
I mist needs take him off.
Now, now be free.
Now liberty, now Country-men, shake from ye
The Tyrants yoke.
All Liberty, liberty, liberty.
Treason, treason, treason.
We are betrayed, fly to the town, cry Treason,
And raise our faithful friends; O my Ascanio.
Make haste, we have way enough.
Treason, treason. 
Spare none, put all to the sword: a vengeance shake thee;
Art thou turned King again?
I am a rascal:
Spare me but this time, if ever I see King more,
Or once believe in King???
The ports are ours.
The treasure and the port, fight bravely Gentlemen;
Cry to the Town, cry liberty and honour;
Waken their persecuted souls, cry loudly, 
We will share the wealth among ye.
Doe you hear Captain?
If ever you hear me, name a King.
You shall not.
Or though I live under one, obey him.
This rogue again.
Away with him good Gunner.
Why look ye Sir? I'll put you to no charge;
I'll never eat.
I'll take a course, you shall not.
Come, no more words. 
Say nothing when you kill me.
He's taken to the Towers strength;
Now stand sure Gentlemen.
We have him in a pen, he cannot scope us,
The rest oth'Castle's ours; liberty, liberty:
What is this City up?
They are up and glorious,
And rolling like a storm they come; their Tents
Ring nothing but liberty and freedom.
The women are in Arms too.
Let 'em come all.
Honour and liberty.
Honour and liberty. 
This women's threats, her eyes, even red with fury
Which like prodigious meteors, foretold
Assured destruction, are still before me.
Besides I know such natures unacquainted
With any mean, or in their love, or hatred,
And she that dared all dangers to possess him,
Will check at nothing, to revenge the loss
Of what she held so dear, I first discovered
Her bloody purposes, which she made good,
And openly professed 'em; that in me
Was but a cold affection; charity
Commands so much to all; for Virolet
Me thinks I should forget my Sexes weakness,
Rise up, and dare beyond a women's strength;
Then doe, not counsel: he is too secure,
And in my judgement, it were a greater service
To free him from a deadly Enemy,
Then to get him a friend. I undertook too,
To cross her plots, opposed my piety,
Against her malice; and shall virtue suffer?
No Martia, were it thou here equally armed,
I have a cause, spite of thy masculine breeding,
That would assure the victory: my angel
Direct and help me. 
The State in Combustion,
Part of the Citadel forced, the treasure seized on;
The guards corrupted, arm themselves against
Their late protected Master; Ferrant fled too,
And with small strength, into the Castles Tower,
The only Aventine, that now is left him?
And yet the undertakers, nay, performers,
Of such a brave and glorious enterprise,
Are yet unknown: they did proceed like men,
I like a child; and had I never trusted
So deep a practise unto shallow fools,
Besides my souls peace, in my Iuliana,
The honour of this action had been mine,
In which, accursed, I now can claim no share.
Ronvere! it is he, a thing, next to the devil
I most detest, and like him terrible;
Martia's right hand, the Instrument I fear too,
That is to put her bloody will into act.
Have I not will enough, and cause too mighty?
Weak women's fear, fly from me.
Sure this habit,
This likeness to Ronvere which I have studied,
Either admits me safe to my design,
Which I too cowardly have halted after,
And suffered to be ravished from my glory;
Or sincks me and my miseries together;
Either concludes me happy.
He stands musing,
Some mischief is now hatching:
In the full meditation, of his wicknesse,
I'll sink his cursed soul: guide my hand heaven,
And to my tender arm give strength and fortune,
That I may doe a pious deed all ages
Shall bless my name for; all remembrance Crown me.
It shall be so.
It shall not, take that token,
And bear it the lustful Arms of Martia,
Tell her, for ??irolets dear sake, I sent it.
O I am happy, let me see thee,
That I may bless the hand that gave me liberty,
O courteous hand, nay, thou hast done most nobly,
And heaven has guided thee, it was their great justice;
O blessed wound, that I could come to kiss thee!
How beautiful, and sweet thou show!
Oh!
Sigh not,
Nor weep not Dear, shed not those sovereign Balsoms
Into my blood; which must recover me;
Then I shall live again, to doe a mischief,
Against the mightiness of love and virtue,
Some base unhallowed hand shall rob thy right off.
Help me, I faint: so.
O unhappy wench!
How has my zeal abused me? you that guard virtue,
Were ye asleep? or doe you laugh at innocence?
You suffered this mistake? O my dear Virolet!
An everlasting curse follow that form
I struck thee in his name ever blasted;
For his accursed shadow has betrayed
The sweetness of all youth, the nobleness,
The honour, and the valour; withered for ever
The beauty and the bravery of all mankind:
O my dull, devils eyes.
I doe forgive you,
By this, and this I doe; I know you were consent;
The shadow of Ronvere, I know you aimed at,
And not at me; but it was most necessary,
I should be struk, some hand above directed you,
For Juliana could not show her justice
Without depriving high heaven of his glory,
Or any subject fit for her, but Virolet;
Forgive me too, and take my last breath sweet one,
This the new marriage of our souls together;
Think of me Iuliana, but not often,
For fear my faults should burden your affections,
Pray for me, for I faint.
O stay a little,
A little little Sir.
Fie Iuliana.
Shall I outlive the virtue, I have murderd?
Hold, or thou hottest my peace; give me the dag???ger;
On your obedience, and your love, deliver it.
If you doe thus, we shall not meet in heaven sweet;
No guilty blood comes there; kill your intentions,
And then you conquer: there where I am going,
Would you not meet me Dear?
Yes.
And still love me?
And still behold you.
Live then till heaven calls you,
Then ripe and full of sweetness you rise Sainted.
Then I that went before you to prepare,
Shall meet and welcome you, and daily court you
With Hymns of holy Love??? I go out,
Give me your hand, farewell, in peace farewell,
Remember me, farewell. 
Sleep you sweet glasses,
An everlasting slumber Crown those Christals,
All my delight adieu, farewell, Dear Virolet,
Dear, Dear, most Dear; O I can weep no more,
My body now is fire, and all consuming,
Here will I sit, forget the world, and all things,
And only waite what heaven shall turn me to,
For now me thinks, I should not live, 
O my sweet daughter,
The work is finished now, I promised thee:
Here are thy virtues showed, here registered,
And here shall live for ever.
Blot it, burn it.
I have no virtue, hateful I am as hell is.
Is not this ??irolet?
Ask no more questions,
Mistaking him, I killed him.
O my Son,
Nature turns to my heart again, my dear Son,
Son of my age, would thou go out so quickly?
So poorly take thy leave, and never see me?
Was this a kind stroke daughter? could you love him?
Honour his Father, and so deadly strike him?
O withered timeless youth, are all thy promises,
Thy goodly growth of Honours come to this?
Doe I halt still in the world, and trouble nature,
When her maine pieces founder, and fail daily?
Boy he does weep certain: what bodies that lies by him?
How doe you Sir?
O look there Lucio,
Thy Master, thy best Master.
Woe is me.
They have killed him, slain him basely, O my Master,
Well daughter well; what heart you had to do this;
I know he did you wrong; but it was his fortune,
And not his fault, for my sake that have loved you,
But I see now, you scorn me too.
O Mistress?
Can you sit there, and his cold body breathless?
Basely upon the earth?
Let her alone Boy,
She glories in his end.
You shall not sit here,
And suffer him you loved ha; good Sir come hither,
Come hither quickly, heave her up; O heaven Sir,
O God, my heart, she's cold; cold and stiff too.
Siffe as a stake, she's dead.
She's gone, no re bend her,
I know her heart, she could not want his company:
Blessing go with thy soul, sweet Angels shadow it
O, that I were the third now, what a happiness?
But I must live, to see you laid in earth both,
Then build a Chapel to your memories,
Where all my wealth shall fashion out your stories.
Then dig a little grave besides, and ell's done.
How sweet she looks, her eyes are open smiling,
I thought she had been alive; you are my charge Sir,
And amongst you, I'll see his goods distributed.
Take up the bodies, mourn in heart my friends,
You have lost two Noble succours; follow me,
And thou sad Country, weep this misery. 
Keep the Ports strongly mand, and let none enter,
But such as are known Patriots.
Liberty, liberty.
It is a substantial thing, and not a word
You men of Naples, which if once taken from us,
All other blessings leave us; it is a Jewel
Worth purchasing, at the dear rate of life,
And so to be defended. O remember
What you have suffered, since you parted with it;
And if again you wish not to be slaves,
And properties to Ferrands pride and lust,
Take noble courage, and make perfect what
Is happily begun.
Our great preserver,
You have enfranchised us, from wretched bondage.
And might be known, to whom we owe our freedom,
We to the death would follow him.
Make him King,
The Tyrant once removed.
That's not my end.
It was not ambition that brought me hither,
With these my faithful friends, nor hope of spoil;
For when we did possess the Tyrants treasure,
By force extorted from you, and employed
To load you with most miserable thraldom,
We did not make it ours, but with it purchased
The help of these, to get you liberty,
That for the same price kept you in subjection.
Nor are we Switzers, worthy Country-men,
But Neapolitans; now eye me well:
And tho the reverend Emblems of mine age,
My Silver locks are shorn, my beard cut off,
Partaking yet of an adulterate Colour;
Tho 14. years you have not seen this face,
You may remember it, and call to mind,
There was a Duke of Sess, A much wronged Prince,
Wronged by this Tyrant Ferrand.
Now I know him.
It is he, long live the Duke of Sess.
I thank you.
The injuries I received, I must confess,
Made me forget the love I owed this Country,
For which I hope, I have given satisfaction,
In being the first that stirred, to give it freedom;
And with your loves and furtherance, will call back,
Long banished peace, and plenty, to this people;
Lead where you please, we will follow.
Dare all dangers.
What solemn funeral's this?
There rest a while,
And if it be possible there can be added
Wings to your swift desire of just revenge,
Hear, (if my tears will give way to my words)
In brief a most sad story.
Speak, what are they?
I know thee well Pandulfe.
My best Lord?
As far as sorrow will give leave, most welcome;
This Virolet was, and but a Son of mine,
I might say, the most hopeful of our Gentry;
And though unfortunate, never Ignoble:
But I'll speak him no further. Look on this,
This face, that in a Savage would move pity,
The wonder of her Sex; and having said
It is Iuliana, Eloquence will want words
To set out her deservings; this blessed Lady
That did endure the Rack, to save her Husband,
That Husband, who, in being forced to leave her,
Endured a thousand tortures; By what practise,
I know not, (bur it was sure a cunning one)
Are made, the last I hope, but sad examples
Of Ferrands Tyranny. Convey the bodies hence.
Express your sorrow
In your revenge, not tears, my worthy Soldiers:
That fertile earth, that teem'd so many children,
To feed his cruelty, in her wounded womb,
Can hardly now receive 'em.
We are cold,
Cold walls shall not keep him from us.
Were he covered with mountains, and room only for a
Bullet to be sent level at him, I would speed him.
Let's scale this petty Tower; at Sea we are Falcons,
And fly unto the maine top in a moment.
What then can stop us here?
We will tear him peece-meale.
Or eat a passage to him.
Let discretion
Direct your anger; that's a victory,
Which is got with least loss, let us make ours such:
And therefore friends, while we hold parley here,
Raise your scalado, on the other side,
But entered weak, your sufferings. 
In our wrongs.
There was no mean.
Nor in our full revenge
Will we know any.
Be appeased good man,
No sorrow can redeem them from deaths Prison;
What his inevitable hand hath seized on,
The world cannot recover. All the comfort
That I can give to you, is to see vengeance
Poured dreadfully upon the Authors head,
Of which their ashes may be sensible,
That have fallen by him. 
They appear.
It is not that we esteem rebellious Traitors
Worthy an answer to their proudest Sommons
That we vouchsafe our presence; or to exchange
One syllable with 'em: but to let such know,
Though Circled round with treason, all points bent
As to their Center at my heart, it is free,
Free from fear villains, and in this weak Tower
Ferrand commands as absolute, as when
He trod upon your necks, and as much scorns you.
And when the Sun of Majesty shall break through
The clouds of your rebellion, every beam
Instead of comfortable heate, shall send
Consuming plagues among you; and you call
That government which you termed tyrannous
Hereafter, gentle.
Flatter not thy self
With these deluding hopes, thou cruel beast,
Thou art in the toil, and the glad Huntsmam prouder,
By whom thou art taken, of his prey, then if
(Like thee) he should command, and spoil his Forest.
What art thou?
To thy horror, Duke of Sesse.
The Devil.
Reserved for thy damnation.
Why shakes my love?
O I am lost for ever;
Mountains divide me from him; some kind hand
Prevent our fearful meeting: Or lead me
To the steep rock, whose rugged brows are bent
Upon the swelling main; there let me hide me:
And as our bodies then shall be divided,
May our souls never meet.
Whence grows this, Sweetest?
There are a thousand furies in his looks;
And in his deadly silence more loud horror,
Then when in Hell the tortured and tormentors
Contend whose shrieks are greater. Wretched me!
It is my father.
Yes, and I will own her, Sir,
Till my revenge. It is my daughter, Ferrand;
My daughter, thou hast whored.
I triumph in it:
To know she's thine, affords me more true pleasure,
Then the act gave me, When even at the height,
I cracked her Virgin zone. Her shame dwell on thee,
And all thy family; may they never know
A female issue, but a whore, Ascanio.
Ronvere, look cheerfully; be thou a man too,
And learn of me to die. That we might fall,
And in our ruins swallow up this Kingdom,
Nay the whole world, and make a second Chaos.
And if from thence a new beginning rise,
Be it recorded this did end with us;
And from our dust hath embryon.
I lived with you,
And will die with you; your example makes me
Equally bold.
And I resolved to bear
What ere my fate appoints me.
They are ours,
Now to the spoil.
Pity the Lady; to all else be deft. 
Within, Kill, kill, kill. 
Cruel beginnings meet with cruel ends;
And the best sacrifice to Heaven for peace,
Is tyrants blood: and those that stuck fast to him,
Fleshed instruments in his commands to mischief,
With him dispatched.
They are all cut off.
Tic well.
Thanks to the Duke of Sesse.
Pay that to Heaven,
And for a general joy, give general thanks:
For blessings ne'er descend from Heaven, but when
A grateful Sacrifice ascends from men.
To your devotion; leave me; there's a Scene,
Which I would act alone; yet you may stay,
For wanting just spectators, twill be nothing.
The rest forbear me.
Liberty liberty, liberty.
I would I were as far beneath the Centre,
As now I stand above it; how I tremble!
Thrice happy they that dyed; I dying live
To stand the whirlwind of a fathers fury.
Now it moves toward me.
Thou, I want a name,
By which to stile thee: All articulate sounds
That do express the mischief of vile woman,
That are, or have been, or shall be, are weak
To speak thee to the height. Witch, parricide,
For thou, in taking leave of modesty,
Hast kilt thy father, and his honour lost;
He's but a walking shadow, to torment thee.
To leave, and rob thy father; then set free
His foes, whose slavery he did prefer
Above all treasure, was a strong defeazance
To cut off, even the surest bonds of mercy.
After all this, having given up thy self,
Like to a sensual beast, a slave to lust,
To play the whore, and then (high Heaven it racks me)
To find out none to quench thy appetite,
But the most cruel King, whom next to Hell,
Thy father hated; and whose black embraces
Thou should have fled from, as the whips of furies;
What can thou look for?
Death; and tic not in you
To hurt me further: my old resolution,
Take now the place of fear; in this I lived,
In this Isle die, your daughter.
Look but here;
You had, I know, a guilty hand in this;
Repent it Lady.
Juliana dead?
And Virolet?
by her unwilling hand.
Fates you are equal. What can now fall on me,
That I will shrink at? now unmoved I dare
Look on your anger, and not bend a knee
To ask your pardon: let your rage run higher
Then billows raised up by a violent Tempest,
And be as that is, deaf to all entreaties:
They are dead, and I prepared; for in their fall
All my desires are summed up.
Impudent too?
Die in it wretch.
Stay sir. 
How dare thou villain,
Snatch from my sword the honour of my justice?
I never did you better service sir,
Yet have been ever faithful. I confess
That she deserved to die; but by whose hand?
Not by a fathers. Double all her guilt,
It could not make you innocent, had you done it.
In me tic murder, in you it were a crime
Heaven could not pardon. Witness that I love you,
And in that love I did it.
Thou art Noble,
I thank thee for it; the thought of her die with her.
My turn is next: since she could find no mercy,
What am I to expect?
With one voice, sir,
The Citizens salute you, with the stile
Of King of Naples.
I must be excused,
The burden is too heavy for my shoulder,
Bestow it where tic due. Stand forth Ascanio,
It does belong to you; live long and wear it,
And warned by the example of your Uncle,
Learn that you are to govern men, not beasts:
And that it is a most improvident head,
That strives to hurt the limbs that do support it.
Give burial to the dead; for me, and mine,
We will again to Sea, and never know,
The place, which in my birth first gave me woe. 

