I Love the K. nor do dispute his power,
For that is not confined, nor to be concurred
By me, that am his Subject) yet allow me
The liberty of a man, that still would be
A friend to Justice, to demand the Motives
That did induce young Ptolomy, or Photinus
(To whose directions he gives up himself,
And I hope wisely) co commit his Sister
The Princess Cleopatra (if I said
The Queen (Achillas) it were (I hope) no treason,
She being by her Fathers testament
(Whose memory I bow to) left Co-heire
In all he stood possessed of.
Tic confessed
(My good Achoreus) that in these Eastern Kingdoms
Women are not exempted from the Sceptre,
But claim a privilege, equal to the Male;
But how much such divisions have tan from
The Majesty of Egypt, and what factions
Have sprung from those partitions, to the ruin
Of the poor Subject, (doubtful which to follow,)
We have too many and too sad examples,
Therefore the wise Photinus, to prevent
The murders, and the massacres, that attend
On dis-united Government, and to show
The King, without a partner, in full splendour,
Thought it convenient, the fair Cleopatra,
(An attribute not frequent in this Climate)
Should be committed to safe custody,
In which she is attended like her Birth,
Until her Beauty, or her royal Dowre,
Hath found her out a Husband.
How this may
Stand with the rules of policy, I know not;
Most sure I am, it holds no correspondence
With the rites of Egypt, or the laws of Nature;
But grant that Cleopatra can sit down
With this disgrace (though insupportable)
Can you imagine, that Romes glorious Senate
(To whose charge, by the will of the dead King
This government was delivered) or great Pompey,
(That is appointed Cleopatra's Guardian
As well as Ptolemies) will ere approve
Of this rash Counsel, their consent not sought for,
That should authorize it?
The Civil war
In which the Roman Empire is embarq'd
On a rough Sea of danger, does exact
Their whole care to preserve themselves, and give them
No vacant time to think of what we do,
Which hardly can concern them.
What's your opinion
Of the success? I have heard, in multitudes
Of soldiers, and all glorious pomp of war,
Pompey is much superior.
I could give you
A Catalogue of all the several Nations
From whence he drew his powers: but that were tedious
They have rich arms, are ten to one in number,
Which makes them think the day already won;
And Pompey being master of the Sea,
Such plenty of all delicates are brought in,
As if the place on which they are entrenched,
Were not a Camp of soldiers, but Rome,
In which Lucullus and Apicius joined
To make a public Feast: they at Dirachium
Fought with success; but knew not to make use of
Fortunes fair offer: so much I have heard
Caesar himself confess.
Where are they now?
In Thessalie, near the Pharsalian plains
Where Caesar with a handful of his Men
Hems in the greater number: his whole troops
Exceed not twenty thousand, but old Soldiers
Fleshed in the spoils of Germany and France,
Inured to his Command, and only know
To fight and overcome; And though that Famine
Reigns in his Camp, compelling them to taste
Bread made of roots, forbid the use of man,
(Which they with scorn threw into Pompeys Camp
As in derision of his Delicates)
Or corn not yet half ripe, and that a Banquet:
They still besiege him, being ambitious only
To come to blows, and let their swords determine
Who hath the better Cause.
May Victory
Attend on it, where it is.
We every hour
Expect to hear the issue.
Save my good Lords;
By Ices and Osiris, whom you worship;
And the four hundred gods and goddesses
Adored in Rome, I am your Honours servant.
Truth needs (Seprinius) no oaths.
You are cruel,
If you deny him swearing, you take from him
Three full parts of his language.
Your Honour's bitter,
Confound me, where I love I cannot say it,
But I must swear it: yet such is my ill fortune,
Nor vows, nor protestations win belief,
I think, and (I can find no other reason)
Because I am a Roman.
No Septinius,
To be a Roman, were an honour to you,
Did not your manners, and your life take from it,
And cry aloud, that from Rome, you bring nothing
But Roman Vices, which you would plant here,
But no seed of her virtues.
With your reverence
I am too old to learn.
Any thing honest,
That I believe, without an oath.
I fear
Your Lordship has slept ill to night, and that
Invites this sad discourse: twill make you old
Before your time: ???of these virtuous Morals,
And old religious principles, that fool us;
I have brought you a new Song, will make you laugh,
Though you were at your prayers.
What is the subject?
Be free Septinius.
It is a Catalogue
Of all the Gamsters of the Court and City,
Which Lord lies with that Lady: and what Gallant
Sports with that Merchants wife; and does relate
Who sells her honour for a Diamond,
Who, for a tissew robe: whose husband's jealous,
And who so kind, that, to share with his Wife
Will make the match himself?
Harmless conceits,
Though fools say they are dangerous: I sang it
The last night at my Lord Photinus table.
How? as a Fiddler?
No Sir, as a Guest,
A welcome guest too: and it was approved of
By a dozen of his friends, though they were touched in it:
For look you, it is a kind of merriment,
When we have laid by foolish modesty
(As not a man of fashion will wear it)
To talk what we have done: at least to hear it:
If merrily, set down, it fires the blood,
And heightens Crestfallen appetite.
New doctrine!
Was it of your own composing?
No, I bought it
Of a skulking Scribler for two Ptolemies:
But the hints were mine own; the wretch was fearful:
But I have damned my self, should it be questioned,
That I will own it.
And be punished for it:
Take heed: for you may so long exercise
Your scurrilous wit against authority,
The Kingdoms Counsels: and make profane Jests,
(Which to you (being an atheist) is nothing)
Against Religion, that your great maintainers
(Unless they would be thought Co-partners with you)
Will leave you to the Law: and then (Septinius)
Remember there are whips.
For whores I grant you,
Till they are out of date, till then are safe too,
Or all the Gallants of the Court are Eunuchs,
And for mine own defence I'll only add this,
I'll be admitted for a wanton tale
To some most private Cabinets, when your Priest-hood
(Though laden with the mysteries of your goddess)
Shall waite without unnoted: so I leave you
To your pious thoughts. 
It is a strange impudence,
This fellow does put on.
The wonder great,
He is accepted of.
Vices, for him,
Make a??? free way as virtues doe for others.
It is the times fault: yet great ones still have grace'd
To make them sport, or rub them o'er with flattery,
Observes of all kinds.
No more of him,
He is not worth our thoughts: a Fugitive
From Pompeys army: and now in a danger
When he should use his service.
See how he hangs
On great Photinus Ear.
Hell, and the furies,
And all the plagues of darkness light upon me:
You are my god on earth: and let me have
Your favour here, fall what can fall hereafter.
Thou art believed: dost thou want money?
No Sir.
Or hast thou any suite? these ever follow
Thy vehement protestations.
You much wrong me;
How can I want, when your beams shine upon me,
Unless employment to express my zeal
To do your Greatness service? doe but think
A deed so dark, the Sun would blush to look on,
For which Man-kind would curse me, and arm all
The Powers above, and those below against me:
Command me, I will on.
When I have use,
I'll put you to the test.
May it be speedy,
And something worth my danger: you are cold,
And know not your own powers: this brow was fashioned
To wear a Kingly wreath, and your grave judgment,
Given to dispose of Monarchies, not to govern
A childes affairs, the peoples eyes upon you,
The Soldier courts you; will you wear a garment
Of sordid loyalty when it is out of fashion?
When Pompey was thy General (Septinius)
Thou said as much to him.
All my love to him,
To Caesar, Rome, and the whole world is lost
In the Ocean of your Bounties: I have no friend,
Project, design, or Country, but your favour,
Which I'll preserve at any rate.
No more;
When I call on you, fall not off: perhaps
Sooner then you expect, I may employ you,
So leave me for a while.
Ever your Creature. 
Good day Achoreus; my best friend Achillas,
Hath fame delivered yet, no certain rumour
Of the great Roman action.
That we are
To enquire, and learn of you Sir: whose grave care
For Egypt happiness; and great Ptolemies good,
Have eyes and ears in all parts.
I'll not boast,
What my Intelligence costs me: but here long
You shall know more. The King, with him a Roman,
The scarlet livery of unfortunate war
Dyed deeply on his face.
It is Labienus
Caesars Lieutenant in the wars of Gaul,
And fortunate in all his undertakings:
But since these Civil Jars he turned to Pompey,
And though he followed the better Cause
Not with the like success.
Such as are wise
Leave falling buildings, fly to those that rise;
But more of that hereafter.
In a word (Sir,)
These gaping wounds, not taken as a slave,
Speak Pompeys os: to tell you of the Battle,
How many thousand several bloody shapes
Death wore tha day, in triumph: how we bore
The shock of Caesars charge: or with what fury
His soldiers came on as if they had been
So many Caesars, and like him ambitious,
To tread upon the liberty of Rome:
How Fathers killed their Sons, or Sons their Fathers,
Or how the Roman Peils on either side
Drew Roman blood, which spent, the Prince of weapons,
(The sword) succeeded, which in Civil wars,
Appoints the Tent, on which winged victory
Shall make a certain Stand, then, how the Plains
Flowd o'er with blood, and what a cloud of vultures
And other birds of prey, hung o'er both armies,
Attending when their ready Servitors,
(The soldiers, from whom the angry gods
Had took all sense of reason, and of pity)
Would serve in their own carcasses for a feast.
How Caesar with his Javelin forced them on
That made the least stop, when their angry hands
Were lifted up against some known friends face;
Then coming to the body of the army
He shows the sacred Senate, and forbids them
To waste their force upon the Common soldier,
Whom willingly, if ere he did know pity,
He would have spared.
The reason Labienus?
Full well he knows, that in their blood he was
To pass to Empire, and that through their bowels,
He must invade the Laws of Rome, and give
A period to the liberty of the world.
Then fell the Lepidi, and the bold Corvini,
The famed Torquati, Scipio's, and Marcelli,
(Names next to Pompeys, most renowned on earth)
The Nobles, and the Commons lay together,
And Pontique, Punique, and Assyrian blood
Made up one crimson Lake: which Pompey seeing,
And that his, and the fate of Rome had left him
Standing upon the Romper of his Camp,
Though scorning all that could fall on himself,
He pities them whose fortunes are embarked
In his unlucky quarrel; cries aloud too
That they should sound retreat, and save themselves:
That he desired not, so much noble blood
Should be lost in his service, or attend
On his misfortunes: and then, taking horse
With some few of his friends, he came to Lesbos,
And with Cornelia, his Wife, and Sons,
He's touched upon your shore: the King of Parthia
(Famous in his defeature of the Crassi)
Offered him his protection, but Pompey
Relying on his Benefits, and your Faith,
Hath chosen Egypt for his Sanctuary,
Till he may recollect his scattered powers,
And try a second day: now Ptolomy,
Though he appear not like that glorious Thing,
That three times rode in triumph, and gave laws
To conquered Nations, and made Crowns his gift
As this of yours, your noble Father took
From his victorious hand, and you still wear it
At his devotion) to do you more honour
In his declined estate, as the straightst Pine
In a full grove of his yet flourishing friends,
He flies to you for succour, and expects
The entertainment of your Fathers friend,
And Guardian to your self.
To say I grieve his fortune
As much as if the Crown I wear (his gift)
Were ravished from me, is a holy truth,
Our Gods can witness for me: yet, being young,
And not a free disposer of my self;
Let not a few hours, borrowed for advice,
Beget suspicion of unthankfulnesse,
(Which next to hell I hate) pray you retire,
And take a little rest, and let his wounds
Be with that care attended, as they were
Carved on my flesh: good Labienus, think
The little respite, I desire shall be
Wholly employed to find the readiest way
To doe great Pompey service.
May the gods
(As you intend) protect you. 
Sit: sit all,
It is my pleasure: your advice, and freely.
A short deliberation in this,
May serve to give you counsel to be honest,
Religious and thankful, in themselves
Are forcible motives, and can need no flourish
Or gloss in the perswader, your kept faith,
(Though Pompey never rise to the height he's fallen from)
Caesar himself will love; and my opinion
Is (still committing it to graver censure)
You pay the debt you owe him, with the hazard
Of all you can call yours.
What's yours (Photinus?)
Achoreus (great Ptolomy) hath counsaild
Like a religious, and honest man,
Worthy the honour that he justly holds
In being Priest to Ices: But alas,
What in a man, sequesterd from the world,
Or in a private person, is preferred,
No policy allows of in a King,
To be or just, or thankful, makes Kings guilty,
And faith (though praised, is punished) that supports
Such as good Fate forsakes: join with the gods,
Observe the man they favour, leave the wretched,
The Stars are not more distant from the Earth
Then profit is from honesty; all the power,
Prerogatives, and greatness of a Prince
Is lost, if he descend once but to steer
His course, as what's right, guides him; let him leave
The Sceptre, that strives only to be good,
Since Kingdoms are maintained by force and blood.
Oh wicked.
Peace: go on.
Proud Pompey shows how much he scorns your youth,
In thinking that you cannot keep your own
From such as are ore-come. If you are tired
With being a King, let not a stranger take
What nearer pledges challenge: resign rather
The government of Egypt and of Nyle
To Cleopatra, that has title to them,
At least defend them from the Roman gripe,
What was not Pompeys, while the wars endured,
The Conqueror will not challenge, by all the world
Forsaken and despised, your gentle Guardian
His hopes and fortunes desperate, makes choice of
What Nation he shall fall with: and pursued
By their pale Ghosts, slain in this Civil War,
He flies not Caesar only, but the Senate,
Of which, the greater part have cloid the hunger
Of sharpe Pharsalian foul he flies the Nations
That he drew to his Quarrel, whose E??????ates
Are sunk in his: and in no place received,
Hath found out Egypt, by him yet not ruined:
And Ptolomy, things considered, justly may
Complain of Pompey: wherefore should he stain
Our Egypt, with the spots of Civil war?
Or make the peaceable, or quiet Nyle
Doubted of Caesar? wherefore should he draw
His loss, and overthrow upon our heads?
Or choose this place to suffer in? already
We have offended Caesar, in our wishes,
And no way left us to redeem his favour
But by the hand of Pompey.
Great Osiris,
Defend thy Egypt from such cruelty,
And barbarous ingratitude!
Holy trifles,
And not to have place in designs of State;
This sword, which Fate commands me to unsheathe,
I would not draw on Pompey, If not vanquished,
I grant it rather should have passed through Caesar,
But we must follow where his fortune leads us;
All provident Princes measure their intents
According to their power: and so dispose them;
And think thou (Ptolomy) that thou can prop
His Ruins, under whom sad Rome now suffers?
Or tempt the Conquerors force when it is confirmed?
Shall we, that in the Battle sate as Neuters
Serve him that's over-come? No, no, hoe's lost.
And though it is noble to a sinking friend
To lend a helping hand while there is hope
He may recover, thy part not engaged:
Though one most dear, when all his hopes are dead,
To drown him, set thy foot upon his head.
Most execrable Council.
To be followed,
It is for the Kingdoms safety.
We give up
Our absolute power to thee: dispose of it
As reason shall direct thee.
Good Achillas,
Seek out Septimius: doe you but sooth him,
He is already wrought: leave the dispatch
To me; of Labienus: it is determined
Already how you shall proceed: nor Fate
Shall alter it, since now the dye is cast,
But that this hour to Pompey is his last. 
Is the Queen stirring (Eros?)
Yes, for in truth
She touched no bed to night.
I am sorry for it,
And wish it were in me, with my hazard
To give her ease.
Sir, she accepts your will,
And does acknowledge she hath found you noble,
So far, as if restraint of liberty
Could give admission to a thought of mirth,
She is your debtor for it.
Did you tell her.
Of the sports I have prepared to entertain her?
She was used to take delight, with her fair hand,
To angle in the Nyle, where the glad fish
(As if they knew who it was sought to deceive 'em)
Contended to be taken: other times
To strike the Stag, who wounded by her arrows,
Forgot his tears in death, and kneeling thanks her
To his last gasp, then prouder of his Fate,
Then if with Garlands Crowned, he had been chosen
To fall a Sacrifice before the altar
Of the Virgin Huntress: the King, nor great Photinus
Forbid her any pleasure; and the Circuit
In which she is confined, gladly affords
Variety of pastimes, which I would
Increase with my best service.
O, but the thought
That she that was borne free, and to dispense
Restraint, or liberty to others, should be
At the devotion of her Brother, whom
She only knows her equal, makes this place
In which she lives (though stored with all delights)
A loathsome dungeon to her.
Yet, (how ere
She shall interpret it) I'll not be wanting
To do my best to serve her: I have prepared
Choice Music near her Cabinet, and composed
Some few lines, (set unto a solemn time)
In the praise of imprisonment. Begin boy.
Look out bright eyes, and bless the ayre:
Even in shadows you are fair.
Shut-up-beauty is like fire,
That breaks out clearer still and higher.
Though your body be confined,
And soft Love a prisoner bound,
Yet the beauty of your mind,
Neither check, nor chain hath found.
Look out nobly then, and dare,
Even the Fetters that you wear.
But that we are assured this tastes of duty,
And love in you (my Guardian) and desire
In you (my Sister) and the rest, to please us,
We should receive this, as a saucy rudeness
Offered our private thoughts. But your intents
Are to delight us: alas, you wash an Ethiop:
Can Cleopatra, while she does remember
Whose daughter she is, and whose Sister? (O
I suffer in the name) and that (in Justice)
There is no place in Egypt, where I stand,
But that the tributary Earth is proud
To kiss the foot of her, that is her Queen,
Can she (I say) that is all this, ever relish
Of comfort, or delight, while base Photinus,
Bond man Achillas, and all other monsters
That reign ore Ptolomy, make that a Court,
Where they reside, and this, where I a Prisoner?
But there's a Rome, a Senate, and a Caesar,
(Though the great Pompey lean to Ptolomy)
May think of Cleopatra.
Pompey (Madam?)
What of him? speak: if ill (Appollodorus)
It is my happiness: and for thy news
Receive a favour (Kings have kneeled in vain for)
And kiss my hand.
Hoe's lost.
Speak it again?
His army routed: he fled and pursued
By the all-conquering Caesar.
Whether bends he?
To Egypt.
Ha! in person?
It is received,
For an undoubted truth,
I live again,
And if assurance of my love, and beauty
Deceive me not, I now shall find a Judge,
To do me right: but how to free my self,
And get access? the Guards are strong upon me,
This door I must pass through, Appollodorus;
Thou often hast professed (to do me service,)
Thy life was not thine own.
I am not altered;
And let your excellence propound a means,
In which I may but give the least assistance,
That may restore you, to that you were borne to,
(Though it call on the anger of the King,
Or, (what's more deadly) all his Minion
Photinus can do to me, I, unmoved,
Offer my throat to serve you: ever provided,
It bear some probable show to be effected,
To loose my self upon no ground, were madness:
Not loyal duty.
Stand off: to thee alone,
I will discover what I dare not trust
My Sister with, Caesar is amorous,
And taken more with the title of a Queen,
Then feature or proportion, he loved Evnoe;
A More, deformed too, I have heard, that brought
No other object to inflame his blood,
But that her husband was a King, on both
He did bestow rich presents; shall I then,
That with a Pincly birth, bring beauty with me,
That know to prize my self at mine own rate,
Despair his favour? art thou mine?
I am.
I have found out away shall bring me to him,
Spite of Photinus watches, if I prosper,
(As I am confident I shall) expect
Things greater then thy wishes, though I purchase
His grace, with loss of my virginity,
It skills not, if it bring home Majesty. 
It is here, it is done, behold you fearful viewers,
Shake, and behold the model of the world here,
The pride, and strength, look, look again, it is finished;
That, that whole Armies, nay whole nations,
Many and mighty Kings, have been struck blind at,
And fled before winged with their fears and terrors,
That steel war waited on, and fortune courted,
That high plumed honour built up for her own:
Behold that mightiness, behold that fierceness,
Behold that child of war, with all his glories;
By this poor hand made breathless, here (my Achillas,
Egypt, and Caesar, owe me for this service,
And all the conquered Nations.
Peace Septimius,
Thy words sound more ungrateful then thy actions,
Though sometimes safety seek an instrument
Of thy unworthy nature, thou (loud boaster)
Think not she is bound to love him too, that's barbarous,
Why did not I, if this be meritorious
And binds the King unto me, and his bounties,
Strike this rude stroke? I'll tell thee (thou poor Roman)
It was a sacred head, I durst not heave at,
Not heave a thought.
It was.
I'll tell thee truly,
And if thou ever yet heard tell of honour,
I'll make thee blush: It was thy Generals;
That mans that fed thee once, that mans that bred thee,
The air thou breath was his: the fire that warmed thee;
From his care kindled ever, nay, I'll show thee,
(Because I'll make thee sensible of thy business:
And why a noble man durst not touch at it)
There was no piece of Earth, thou puts thy foot on
But was his conquest; and he gave thee motion,
He triumphed three times, who durst touch his person?
The very walls of Rome, bowed to his presence,
Dear to the Gods he was, to them that feared him
A fair and noble Enemy, did thou hate him?
And for thy love to Caesar, sought his ruin?
Armed the red Pharsalian fields (Septimius)
Where killing was in grace, and wounds were glorious,
Where Kings were fair competitors for honour,
Thou should have come up to him, there have sought him.
There, sword, to sword.
I killed him on commandment,
If Kings commands be fair, when you all fainted,
When none of you durst look???
On deeds so barbarous,
What hast thou got?
The Kings love, and his bounty,
The honour of the service, which though you rail at;
Or a thousand envious souls fling their foams on me,
Will dignify the cause, and make me glorious:
And I shall live.
A miserable villain,
What reputation, and reward belongs to it?
Thus (with the head) I seize on, and make mine;
And be not impudent to ask me why (Sirha)
Nor bold to stay, read in mine eyes, the reason:
The shame and obloquy, I leave thine own,
Inherit those rewards, they are fitter for thee,
Your oyle's spent, and your snuff stinks: go out basely.
The King will yet consider. 
Here he comes Sir.
Yet if it be undone: hear me great Sir,
If this inhumane stroke be yet unstrooken,
If that adored head be not yet severed
From the most noble Body, weigh the miseries:
The desolations that this great Eclipse works,
You are young, be provident: fix not your Empire
Upon the Tomb of him, will shake all Egypt,
Whose warlike groans will raise ten thousand Spirits,
(Great as himself) in every hand a thunder;
Destructions darting from their looks and sorrows,
That easy women's eyes shall never empty.
You have done well; and it is done, see Achillas,
And in his hand the head.
Stay come no nearer,
Me thinks, I feel the very earth shake under me,
I do remember him, he was my guardian,
Appointed by the Senate to preserve me:
What a full Majesty fits in his face yet?
The King is troubled: be not frighted Sir,
Be not abused with fears; his death was necessary,
If you consider (Sir) most necessary,
Not to be missed: and humbly thank great Ices:
He came so opportunely to your hands;
Pity must now give place to rules of safety,
Is not victorious Caesar, new arrived:
And entered Alexandria, with his friends,
His Navy riding by to wait his charges?
Did he not beat this Pompey, and pursued him?
Was not this great man, his great enemy?
This Godlike virtuous man, as people held him,
But what fool dare be friend to flying virtue?
I hear their Trumpets, it is too late to stagger,
Give me the head, and be you confident:
Hail Conqueror, and head of all the world,
Now this head's off.
Ha?
Do not shun me (Caesar)
From kingly Ptolomy, I bring this present,
The Crown, and sweat of thy Pharsalian labour:
The goal and mark of high ambitious honour,
Before thy victory had no name (Caesar)
Thy travel and thy loss of blood, no recompense,
Thou dreamst of being worthy, and of war;
And all thy furious conflicts were but slumbers,
Here they take life: here they inherit honour,
Grow fixed, and shoot up everlasting triupmhes,
Take it, and look upon thy humble servant,
With noble eyes look on the Princely Ptolomy,
That offers with this head (most mighty Caesar)
What thou would once have given for it, all Egypt.
Nor do not question it (most royal Conqueror)
Nor dis-esteeme the benefit that meets thee,
Because it is easily got, it comes the safer:
Yet let me tell thee (most imperious Caesar)
Though he opposed no strength of Swords to win this,
Nor labourd through no showers of darts, and lances:
Yet here he found a fort, that faced him strongly
An inward war: he was his Grand sires Guest;
Friend to his Father, and when he was expelled
And beaten from this Kingdom by strong hand,
And had none left him, to restore his honour,
No hope to find a friend, in such a misery;
Then in stepped Pompey: took his feeble fortune:
Strengthend, and cherished it, and set it right again,
This was a love to Caesar.
Give me, hate, Gods.
This Caesar, may account a little wicked,
But yet remember, if thine own hands (Conqueror)
Had fallen upon him, what it had bin then?
If thine own Sword had touched his throat, what that way!
He was thy Son in law, there to be tainted,
Had bin most terrible: let the worst be rendered,
We have deserved for keeping thy hands innocent.
Oh Sceva, Sceva, see that head: see Captains,
The head of godlike Pompey.
He was basely ruined,
But let the Gods be grieved that suffered it,
And be you Caesar???
Oh thou Conqueror,
Thou glory of the world once, now the pity:
Thou awe of Nations, wherefore did thou fall thus?
What poor fate followed thee, and plucked thee on
To trust thy sacred life to an Egyptian;
The life and light of Rome, to a blind stranger:
That honourable war ne'er taught a nobleness,
Nor worthy circums???ance showed what a man was,
That never heard thy name sang, but in banquets;
And loose lascivious pleasures? to a Boy,
That had no faith to comprehend thy greatness:
No study of thy life to know ???hy goodness;
And leave thy Nation, nay, thy noble friend,
Leave him (distrusted) that in tears falls with thee?
(In soft relenting tears) hear me (great Pompey
(If thy great spirit can hear) I must task thee:
Thou hast most unnobly robed me of my victory,
My love, and mercy.
O how brave these tears show?
How excellent is sorrow in an Enemy?
Glory appears not greater then this goodness.
Egyptians, dare you think your high Pyramids,
Built to out-dare the Sun, as you suppose,
Where your unworthy Kings, lye raked in ashes:
Are monuments fit for him? no, (brood of Nilus)
Nothing can cover his high fame, but heaven;
No Pyramids set off his memories:
But the eternal substance of his greatenesse
To which I leave him, take the head away,
And (with the body) give it noble burial,
Your Earth shall now be blessed to hold a Roman,
Whose braveryes all the worlds-earth cannot balance.
If thou be thus loving, I shall honour thee,
But great men may dissemble; it is held possible,
And be right glad of what they seem to weep for,
Xhere are such kind of Philosophers; now do I wonder
How he would look if Pompey were alive again,
But how he would set his face?
You look now (King)
And you that have been Agents in this glory,
For our especial favour?
We desire it.
And doubtless you expect rewards.
Let me give 'em:
I'll give 'em such as nature never dreamt of,
I'll beat him and his Agents (in a mortar)
Into one man, and that one man I'll bake then.
Peace: I forgive you all that's recompense:
You are young, and ignorant, that pleads your pardon,
And fear it may be more then hate provoked ye;
Your Ministers I must think wanted judgement,
And so they erd: I am bountiful to think this;
Believe me most bountiful: Be you most thankful,
That bounty share amongst ye; if I knew
What to send you for a present King of Egypt;
(I mean a head of equal reputation
And that you loved) though it were your brightest Sisters,
(But her you hate) I would not be behind ye.
Hear me (great Caesar.)
I heave hard too much
And study not with smooth shows, to invade
My noble mind, as you have done my conquest:
Ye are poor and open: I must tell you roundly,
That man that could not recompense the benefits;
The great and bounteous services of Pompey
Can never dote upon the name of Caesar;
Though I had hated Pompey, and allowed his ruin,
I gave you no commission to perform it:
Hasty to please in blood, are seldom trusty,
And but I stand invirond with my victories;
My fortune never failing to be friend me,
My noble strengths, and friends about my person,
I durst not try ye, nor expect a courtesy,
Above the pious love, you showed to Pompey,
You have found me merciful in arguing with ye:
Swords, Hangers, Fires, destructions of all natures,
Demolishments of Kingdoms, and whole Ruins
Are wont to be my Orators, turn to tears,
You wretched, and poor Seeds of Sun-burnt Egypt,
And now you have found the nature of a Conqueror,
That you cannot decline, with all your flatteries,
That where the day gives light, will be himself still.
Know how to meet his worth with humane courtesies,
Go, and embalm those bones of that great Soldier;
Howl round about his pile, fling on your Spices,
Make a Sabean bed, and place this Phoenix
Where the hot Sun may emulate his virtues,
And draw another Pompey from his ashes
Divinely great, and fix him amongst the worthies.
We will doe all.
You have robed him of those tears
His kindred, and his friends kept sacred for him:
The Virgins of their funeral Lamentations:
And that kind Earth that thought to cover him,
(His Countries Earth) will cry out against your cruelty,
And weep unto the Ocean for revenge,
Till Nilus raise his seven heads and devour ye:
My grief has stopped the rest; when Pompey lived
He used you nobly, now he is dead, use him so. 
Now whore's your confidence? your aim (Photinus)
The Oracles, and fair Favours from the Conqueror
You rung into mine ears? how stand I now?
You see the tempest of his sterne displeasure,
The death of him you urged a Sacrifice
To stop his rage, presaging a full ruin;
Where are your Counsels now?
I told ye Sir,
(And told the truth) what danger would fly after:
And though an Enemy, I satisfied you
He was a Roman, and the top of honour;
And howsoever this might please great Caesar,
I told ye that the foulness of his death
The impious baseness ???
Peace, ye are a fool,
Men of deep ends, must tread as deep ways to'm;
Caesar I know is pleased, and for all his sorrows
(Which are put on for forms and mere dissemblings)
I am confident he's glad: to have told ye so,
And thank ye outwardly, had bin too open,
And taken from the wisdom of a Conqueror.
Be confident, and proud ye have done this service;
Ye have deserved, and ye will find it highly:
Make bold use of this benefit, and be sure
You keep your Sister, (the high-sould-Cleopatra,)
Both close and short enough, she may not see him:
The rest, if I may council sir.???
Doe all:
For in thy faithful service rests my safety. 
Heere's a strange alteration in the Court;
Men's faces are of other sets, and motions,
Their minds of subtler stuff: I pass by now
As though I were a Rascal, no man knows me,
No eye looks after: as I were a plague,
Their doors shut close against me: and I wondered at
Because I have done a meritorious Murder,
Because I have pleased the Time, does the Time plague me?
I have known the day they would have huggd me for it:
For a less stroke then this, have done me reverence:
Opend their hearts, and secret closets to me
Their purses, and their pleasures, and bid me wallow.
I now perceive the great Thieves eat the less,
And the huge Leviathans of Villainy
Sup up the merits, nay the men and all
That doe them service, and spout 'em out again
Into the ayre, as thin, and unregarded
As drops of water; that are lost in the Ocean;
I was loved once for swearing, and for drinking,
And for other principal Qualities, that became me,
Now a foolish unthankful murder has undone me,
If my Lord Photinus be not merciful
That set me on: And he comes, now fortune.
Caesars unthankfulnesse a little stirs me
A little frets my blood: take heed, proud Roman,
Provoke me not; stir not my anger farther:
I may find out a way unto thy life too,
(Though armed in all thy Victories) and seize it,
A Conqueror has a heart, and I may hit it.
May it please your Lordship?
O Septinius!
Your Lordship knows my wrongs.
Wrongs?
Yes my, Lord,
How the Captain of the Guard Achillas, slights me.
Think better of him, he has much be friended thee,
Showed thee much love in taking the head from thee.
The times are altered (Soldier) Caesars angry,
And our design to please him, lost, and perished:
Be glad thou art unnamed it is not worth the owning;
Yet, that thou moist be useful ???
Yes my Lord,
I shall be ready.
For I may employ thee
To take a rub or too out of my way
As time shall serve: say that it be a Brother?
Or a hard Father?
It is most necessary,
A Mother, or a Sister; or whom you please (sir.)
Or to betray a noble friend.
Tic all one.
I know thou wilt stir for gold.
Tic all my motion.
There take that for thy service, and farewell:
I have greater business now.
I am still your own, Sir.
One thing I charge thee; see me no more
Unless I send. 
I shall observe your hour.
So, this brings something in the mouth; some savour,
This is the Lord I serve, the power I worship,
My friends, Allies, And here lies my Allegiance.
Let people talk as they please of my rudeness,
And shun me for my deed: bring but this to 'em,
(Let me be damned for blood) yet still I am honourable,
This God creates new tongues, and new affections:
And though I had killed my Father, give me gold,
I'll make men swear I have done a pious Sacrifice.
Now I will out-brave all: make all my Servants,
And my brave deed shall be writ in wine, for virtuous.
Keep strong guards, and with wary eyes (my friends)
There is no trusting to these base Egyptians:
They that are false to pious benefits,
And make compelled necessities their faiths
Are traitors to the Gods.
Weel'e call a shore,
A legion of the best.
Not a man (Antony)
That were to show our fears, and dim our greatness:
No it is enough my name's a shore.
Too much too,
A sleeping Caesar, is enough to shake them;
There are some two or three malicious Rascals
Trained up in villainy, besides that Cerberus
That Roman dog, that licked the blood of Pompey.
It is strange, a Roman Soldier?
You are consent,
There be of us, as be of all other nations,
Villains, and Knaves? it is not the name contains him,
But the obedience: when that's once forgotten,
And duty flung away, then welcome Devil,
Photinus and Achillas, and this vermin:
That's now become a natural Crocodile,
Must be with care observed.
And it is well counselled
No confidence, nor trust???
Isle trust the Sea first,
When with her hollow murmurs she invites me,
And cluches in her storms, as politic Lyons
Conceal their claws: Isle trust the Devil first:
The rule of ill, I le trust before the door.
Go to your rests: &amp; follow your own wisdoms,
And leave me to my thoughts: pray no more complement,
Once more strong watches.
All shall be observed, Sir. 
I am dull, and heavy: yet I cannot sleep,
How happy was I, in my lawful wars
In Germany, and Gaul, and Brittany?
When every night with pleasure I sat down
What the day ministered? the sleep came sweetly.
But since I undertook this home-division,
This civil war, and past the Rubicon,
What have I done, that speaks an ancient Roman?
A good, great Man? I have entered Rome by force,
And on her tender womb, (that gave me life)
Let my insulting Soldiers rudely trample,
The dear veins of my Country, I have opend
And sailed upon the torrents that flowd from her,
The bloody streams, that in their confluence
Carried before 'em thousand desolations;
Robed the treasury, and at one gripe
Snatched all the wealth, so many worthy triumphs,
Placed there as sacred to the peace of Rome;
I raised Massilia, in my wanton anger:
Petreius and Affrinius I defeated.
Pompey I over threw; what did that get me?
The stubbord name of an authorised enemy; 
I hear some noises: they are the watches sure,
What friends have I tide fast, by these ambitions?
Cato, the lover of his Countries freedom
Is past now into Affrik, to affront me,
Juha, (that killed my friend) is up in arms too:
The Sons of Pompey, are Masters of the Sea???
And from the relics of their scattered faction,
A new head's sprung: Say I defeat all these too:
I come home Crowned an honourable Rebel,
I hear the noise still, and it comes still nearer:
Are the guards fast? who waits there?
Are ye awake Sir?
'Ith name of wonder.
Nay I am a Porter,
A strong one too: or else my sides would crack Sir,
And my sins were as weighty, I should scarce walk with 'em.
What hast thou there?
Ask them which stay without,
And brought it hither, your presence I denied 'em:
And put 'em by: took up the load my self,
They say it is rich: and valude at the Kingdom,
I am sure it is heavy: if you like to see it;
You may, if not I'll give it back.
Stay Sceva,
I would fine see it.
I'll begin to work then:
No doubt to flatter ye, they have sent ye something,
Of a rich value, Jewels, or some Treasure;
May be a Rogue within, to do a mischief:
I pray you stand farther off, if there be villainy,
Better my danger first: he shall scope hard too,
Ha? what art thou?
Stand farther off (good Sceva)
What heavenly vision? do I wake or slumber?
Farther off that hand friend.
What apparition,
What Spirit have I raised? sure it is a woman:
She looks like one: Now she begins to move too:
A tempting Devil, ?? my life: go off Caesar,
Bless thy self off, a band grown in mine old days?
Bawdry advanced upon my back? it is noble;
Sir, if you be a Soldier come no nearer,
She is sent to dispossess you of your honour,
A sponge, a sponge, to wipe away your victories:
And she would be cooled (Sir) let the Soldiers trim her?
They'll give her that she came for, and dispatch her;
Be loyal to your self: thou damned woman
Dost thou come hither with thy flourishes,
Thy flaunts, and faces, to abuse men's manners?
And am I made the instrument of bawdry?
I'll find a lover for ye, one shall hug ye;
Hold on thy life: and be more temperate,
Thou beast.
Thou beast?
Coldest thou be so inhumane,
So far from noble men to draw thy weapon,
Upon a thing divine?
Divine, or humane,
They are never better pleased, nor more at harts-ease,
Then when we draw with full intent upon 'em.
Move this way (Lady)
Pray ye let me speak to ye.
And woman, you had best stand.
By the Gods,
But that I see her here, and hope her mortal:
I should imagine some celestial sweetness,
The treasure of soft love.
Oh, this sounds mangely,
Poorly; and scurvely in a Soldiers mouth:
You had best be troubled with the Tooth-ach too:
For lovers ever are, and let your nose drop
That your celestial beauty may be-friend ye:
At these years do you learn to be fantastical?
After so many bloody fields, a fool?
She brings her bed along too; she'll loose no time,
Carries her Litter to lye soft, do you see that?
Invites ye like a Gamester: note that impudence,
For shame reflect upon your self, your honour,
Look back into your noble parts and blush:
Let not the dear sweat of the hot Pharsalia,
Mingle with base Embraces; am I he
That have received so many wounds for Caesar?
Upon my Target, groves of darts still growing?
Have I endured all hungers, colds, distresses,
And as I had been bred that Iron that armed me)
Stood out all weathers, now to curse my fortune?
To ban the blood I lost for such a General?
Offend no more: be gon.
I will, and leave ye,
Leave ye to women's wars, that will proclaim ye:
You'll conquer Rome now, and the Capitol
With Fans, and Looking-glasses, farewell Caesar.
Now I am private sir, I dare speak to ye:
But thus low first, for as a God I honour ye.
Lower you'll be anon.
Away.
And privater,
For that you covet all. 
Tempt me no farther.
Contemn me not, because I know thus (Caesar)
I am a Queen, and coheire to this country,
The sister to the mighty Ptolomy,
Yet one distressed, that flies unto thy justice,
One that lays sacred hold on thy protection
As on a holy Altar, to preserve me.
Speak Queen of beauty, and stand up.
I dare not,
'Till I have found that favour in thine eyes,
That godlike great humanity to help me,
Thus, to thy knees must I grow: (sacred Caesar,)
And if it be not in thy will, to right me,
And raise me like a Queen from my sad ruins,
If these soft tears cannot sink to thy pity;
And waken with their murmurs thy compassions:
Yet for thy nobleness, for virtues sake,
And if thou be a man, for despised beauty,
For honourable conquest, which thou do'tst on:
Let not those cankers of this flourishing Kingdom,
Photinus, and Achillas, (the one an Evnuch,)
The other a base bondsman, thus reign over me,
Seize my inheritance, and leave my brother
Nothing of what he should be, but the Title:
As thou art wonder of the world.
Stand up then
And be a Queen, this hand shall give it to ye,
Or chose a greater name, worthy my bounty:
A common love makes, Queens: chose to be worshipped,
To be divinely great, and I dare promise it,
A suitor of your sort, and blessed sweetness:
That hath adventured thus to see great Caesar,
Must never be denied, you have found a patron
That dare not in his private honour, suffer
So great a blemish to the heaven of beauty:
The God of love would clap his angry wings,
And from his singing bow, let fly those arrows
Headed with burning grieves, and pining sorrows:
Should I neglect your cause would make me monstrous,
To whom and to your service I devote me.
He is my conquest now, and so I'll work him,
The conqueror of the world will I lead captive,
Still with this woman? tilting still with Babies?
As you are honest think the Enemy,
Some valiant Foe indeed now charging on ye:
Ready to break your ranks, and fling these???
Hear me,
But tell me true, if thou had such a treasure:
(And as thou art a Soldier, do not flatter me)
Such a bright gem, brought to thee, would thou not
Most greedily accept?
Not as an Emperor,
A man that first would rule him self, then others,
As a poor hungry Soldier, I might bite, Sir,
Yet that's a weakness too: hear me, thou Tempter:
And hear thou Caesar too, for it concerns thee,
And if thy flesh be deaf yet let thine honour,
The soul of a commander, give ear to me,
Thou wanton bane of war, thou gilded Lethargy,
In whose embraces, ease (the rust of Arms)
And pleasure, (that makes Soldiers poor) inhabits.
Fie, thou blasphem'st.
I do, when she is a goddess,
Thou melter of strong minds, dare thou presume
To smother all his triumphs, with thy vanities,
And tie him like a slave, to thy proud beauties?
To thy imperious looks? that Kings have followed
Proud of their chains? have waited on? I shame Sir. 
Alas thou art rather mad: take thy rest Sceva,
Thy duty makes thee err, but I forgive thee:
Go: go I say, show me no disobedience:
It is well, farewell, the day will break dear Lady,
My Soldiers will come in; please you retire,
And think upon your servant?
Pray you Sir, know me,
And what I am.
The greater, I more love ye,
And you must know me too.
So far as modesty,
And majesty gives leave Sir, ye are too violent.
You are too cold to my desires.
Swear to me,
And by your self (for I hold that oath sacred)
You will right me as a Queen???
These lips be witness,
And if I break that oath???
You make me blush Sir,
And in that blush interpret me.
I will do,
Come let's go in, and blush again: this one word,
You shall believe.
I must, you are a conqueror. 
GOod Sir, but hear.
No more, you have undone me,
That, that I hourly feared, is fallen upon me,
And heavily, and deadly.
Hear a remedy.
A remedy now the disease is ulcerous?
And has infected all? your secure negligence
Has broke through all the hopes I have, and ruined me:
My Sister is with Caesar, in his chamber,
All night she has bin with him; and no doubt
Much to her honour.
Would that were the worst, Sir,
That will repair it self: but I fear mainly,
She has made her peace with Caesar.
It is most likely,
And what am I then?
Plague upon that Rascal
Apollodorus, under whose command,
Under whose eye??? 
Curse on you all, ye are wreches.
It was providently don
Pardon me.
Your guards were rarely wise, and wondrous watchful.
I could not help it, if my life had lain for it,
Alas, who would suspect a pack of bedding:
Or a small Truss of household furniture?
And as they said for Caesars use:) or who durst
(Being for his private chamber) seek to stop it?
I was abused. 
It is no hour now for anger:
No wisdom to debate with fruitless choler,
Let us consider timely what we must do,
Since she is flown to his protection:
From whom we have no power to sever her,
Nor force conditions ???
Speak (good Achoreus)
Let indirect and crooked counsels vanish,
And straight, and fair directions ???
Speak your mind Sir.
Let us choose Caesar, and endear him to us,)
An Arbitrator in all differences,
Betwixt you, and your sister; this is safe now:
And will show off, most honourable.
Base,
Most base and poor; a servile, cold submission:
Hear me, and pluck your hearts up, like stout Counsellours,
Since we are sensible this Caesar loads us,
And have begun our fortune, with great Pompey
Be of my mind.
It is most uncomely spoken,
And if I say most bloodily, I lye not:
The law of hospitality, it poisons,
And calls the Gods in question that dwell in us,
Be wise O King.
I will be: go my counsellour,
To Caesar go, and do my humble service:
To my fair sister my commends negotiate,
And here I retefie what ever thou treat'st on.
Crowned with fair peace, I go. 
My love go with thee,
And from my love go you, you cruel vipers:
You shall know now I am no ward, Photinus.
This for our service?
Princes do their pleasures,
And they that serve obey in all disgraces:
The lowest we can fall to, is our graves,
There we shall know no difference: hark Achillas,
I may do something yet, when times are ripe,
To tell this rare unthankful King.
What ever it be I shall make one: and zealously:
For better dye attempting something nobly,
Then fall disgraced.
Thou Iou'st me and I thank thee. 
Nay there's no rousing him: he is bewitched sure,
His noble blood crudled, and cold within him;
Grown now a women's warrior.
And a tall one:
Studies her fortifications, and her breaches,
And how he may advance his ram to batter
The Bulwark of her chastity.
Be not too angry,
For by this light, the woman's a rare woman,
A Lady of that catching youth, and beauty,
That unmatched sweetness???
But why should he be foold so?
Let her be what she will, why should his wisdom,
His age, and honour ???
Say it were your own case,
Or mine, or any mans, that has heate in him:
It is true at this time when he has no promise
Of more security then his sword can cut through,
I do not hold it so discreet: but a good face (Gentleman)
And eyes that are the winningst Orators:
A youth that opens like perpetual spring,
And to all these, a tongue that can deliver
The Oracles of Love???
I would you had her,
With all her Oracles, and Miracles,
She were fitter for your turn.
Would I had (Sceva)
With all her faults too: let me alone to mend'em,
O that condition I made thee mine heir.
I had rather have your black horse, then your har???lots.
Caesar writes Sonnetts now, the sound of war
Is grown to boisterous for his mouth: he sighs too.
And learns to fiddle most melodiously,
And sings, it would make your ears prick up, to hear him (Gent.)
Shortly she'll make him spin: &amp; it is thought
He will prove an admirable maker of Bone-lace,
And what a rare gift will that be in a general?
I would he could abstain.
She is a witch sure,
And works upon him with some damned enchantment.
How cunning she will cary her behaviours,
And set her countenance in a thousand postures:
To catch her ends?
She will be sick, well, sullen,
Merry, coy, overjoyed, and seem to dye
All in one half an hour, to make an ass of him,
I make no doubt she will be drunk too: damnably,
And in her drink will fight, then she fits him.
That thou should bring her in?
It was my blind fortune,
My Soldiers told me, by the waite it was wicked:
Would I had carried Milos Bull a furlong,
When I brought in this Cow-Calfe: he has advanced me,
From an old Soldier, to a bawed of memory:
O, that the Sons of Pompey were behind him,
The honoured Cato, and fierce Juba with 'em,
That they might whip him from his whore, &amp; rowze him:
That their fierce Trumpets, from his wanton trances,
Might shake him like an Earthquake.
What's this fellow?
Why, a brave fellow, if we judge men by their clothes,
By my faith he is brave indeed: he's no co??mander.
Yes, he has a Roman face, he has been at fair wars
And plenteous too, and rich, his Trappings show it.
And they will not know me now, they'll never know me,
Who dare blush now at my acquaintance? ha?
Am I not totally a span-new Gallant
Fit for the choicest eyes? have I not gold?
The friendship of the world? if they shun me now?
(Though I were the arrantest Rogue, as I am well forward,
Mine own curse, and the Devils are light on me.
Is it not Septinius?
Yes.
He that killed Pompey?
The same Dog, Scab; that gilded botch, that rascal
How glorious villainy appears in Egypt?
Gallants, and Soldiers, sure they doe admire me.
Stand further off, thou stinkest
A likely matter:
These Clothes smell mustily, doe they not Gallants?
They stink they stink, alas poor things, contemptible
By all the Gods in Egypt, the perfumes
That went to trimming these clothes, cost me???
Thou stinkest still.
The powdering of this head too ???
If thou hast it
I'll tell thee all the Gumms in sweet Arabia
Are not sufficient, were they burnt about thee,
To purge the sent of a rank Rascal from thee,
I smell him now: fie, how the Knave perfumes him,
How strong he scents of Traitor?
You had an ill Milliner,
He laid too much of the Gum of Ingratitude
Upon your Coat, you should have washed off that sir,
Fie, how it chokes, too little of your loyalty
Your honesty, your faith, that are pure Embers,
I smell the rotten smell of a hired Coward,
A dead Dog is sweeter.
Ye are merry Gentlemen
And by my troth, such harmless mirth takes me too,
You speak like good blunt Soldiers; and it is well enough,
But did you live at Court, as I doe (Gallants)
You would refine, and learn an apter language;
I have done ye simple service on your Pompey,
You might have looked him yet this brace of twelve months
And hunted after him, like founderd Beagles,
Had not this fortunate hand ???
He brags on it too:
By the good Gods, rejoices in it; thou wretch
Thou most contemptible Slave.
Dog, mangy Mongrel,
Thou murdering mischief, in the shape of Soldier
To make all Soldiers hateful; thou disease
That nothing but the Gallows can give ease to. ???
Thou art so impudent, that I admire thee
And know not what to say.
I know your anger
And why you prate thus: I have found your melancholy
Ye all want money, and you are liberal Captains
And in this want, will talk a little desperately:
Heere's gold, come share; I love a brave Commander:
And be not peevish, doe as Caesar does:
He's merry with his wench now, be you jovial,
And let's all laugh and drink: would ye have partners?
I doe consider all your wants, and weigh'em,
He has the Mistress, you shall have the maids,
I'll bring'em to ye, to your arms.
I Blush,
All over me, I blush, and sweat to hear him:
Upon my conscience, if my Arms were on now
Through them I should blush too: pray ye let's be walking.
Yes, yes: but ere we go, I'll leave this lesson,
And let him study it: first Rogue, then Pander,
Next Devil that will be; get thee from men's presence,
And where the name of Soldier has been heard of
Be sure thou live not: to some hungry desert
Where thou can meet with nothing but thy conscience,
(And that in all the shapes of all thy villainies)
Attend thee still, where bruit Beasts will abhor thee,
And even the Sun will shame to give thee light
Go hide thy head: or if thou think it fitter
Go hang thy self.
Hark to that clause,
And that speedily
That nature may be eased of such a Monster. 
Yet all this moves not me: nor reflects on me:
I keep my God still, and my confidence,
Their want of breeding, makes these fellows murmur
Rude valorus, so I let 'em pass; rude honours:
There is a wench yet, that I know, affects me
And company for a King: a young plump villain,
That when she sees this gold, she'll leap upon me,
And here she comes: I am sure of her at midnight,
My pretty Eros welcome.
I have business.
Above my love, thou can not.
Yes indeed sir,
Far, far above.
Why, why so coy? 'pray ye tell me
We are alone.
I am much ashamed we are so.
You want a new Gown now, &amp; a handsome Petticoat,
A Scarf, and some odd toys: I have gold here ready,
Thou shalt have any thing.
I want your absence:
Keep on your way, I care not for your company.
How? how? you are very short: doe you know me Eros?
And what I have been to ye?
Yes I know ye:
And I hope I shall forget ye: Whilst you were honest
I loved ye too.
Honest? come prithee kiss me.
I kiss no knaves: no Murderers, no Beasts,
No base betrayers of those men, that fed 'em,
I hate their looks; and though I may be wanton,
I scorn to nourish it, with blood purchase,
Purchase so foully got; I pray ye unhand he,
I had rather touch the plague, then one unworthy:
Go seek some Mistress, that a horse may marry
And keep her company, she is too good for ye. 
Marry this goes near; now I perceive I am hateful,
When this light stuffs can distinguish, it grows dangerous,
For money seldom they refuse a Leper:
But sure I am more odious, more diseased too:
It sits cold here; what are these? three poor Soldiers?
Both poor and lame: their misery may make 'em
A little look upon me, and adore me,
If these will keep me company, I am made yet.
The pleasure Caesar sleeps in, makes us miserable,
We are forgot, our maims, and dangers laughed at;
He Banquets, and we beg.
He was not wont
To let poor Soldiers that have spent their Fortunes,
Their Bloods, &amp; limbs, walk up &amp; down like vagabonds,
Save ye good Soldiers: good poor men, heaven help ye:
You have borne the brunt of war, and show the story.
Some new commander sure.
You look (my good friends)
By your thin faces, as you would be Suitors.
Caesar, for our means (Sir.)
And it is fit Sir.
We are poor men, and long forgot.
I grieve for it:
Good Soldiers should have good rewards, and favours,
I'll give up your petitions, for I pity ye,
And freely speak to Caesar.
O we honour ye.
A good man sure ye are the Gods preserve ye.
And to relieve your wants the while, hold soldiers
Nay it is no dream: it is good gold: take it freely,
Twill keep ye in good heart.
Now goodness quit ye.
I'll be a friend to your afflictions,
And eat, and drink with ye too, and we'll be merry:
And every day I'll see ye.
You are a soldier,
And one sent from the Gods, I think.
I'll cloth ye,
Ye are lame, and then provide good lodging for ye:
And at my Table, where no want shall meet ye.
Was never such a man.
Dear honoured Sir,
Let us but know your name, that we may worship ye.
That we may ever thank?
Why, call me anything,
No matter for my name that may betray me.
A cunning thief, call him Septinius (soldiers)
The villain that killed Pompey.
How?
Call him the shame of men. 
O that this money,
Were weight enough to break thy brains out: fling all:
And fling our curses next: let them be mortal,
Out bloody wolf, dost thou come gilded over,
And painted with the charities, to poison us?
I know him now: may never Father own thee,
But as a monstrous birth shun thy base memory;
And if thou had a Mother (as I cannot
Believe thou were a natural Burden, let her womb,
Be cursed of women for a bed of vipers.
Me thinks the ground shakes to devour this Rascal,
And the kind air turns into fogs, and vapours
The infectious mists, to Crown his villainies,
Thou moist go wander, like a thing heaven hated.
And valiant minds hold poisonous to remember
The Hangman will not keep thee company,
He has an honourable house to thine,
No, not a theife though thou could save his life for it
Will eat thy bread, nor one, for thirst starved, drink with thee.
Thou art no company for an honest dog,
And so we'll leave thee to a ditch (thy destiny) 
Contemned of all? and kicked too? now I find it;
My valour fled too, with mine honesty,
For since I would be knave I must be Coward:
This it is to be a Traitor, and betrayer,
What a deformity dwells round about me?
How monstrous shows that man, that is ungrateful?
I am a afraid the very beasts will tear me,
Inspired with what I have done: the winds will blast me:
Now I am paid, and my reward dwells in me,
The wages of my fact, my souls oppressed,
Honest and noble minds, you find most rest. 
I have commanded, and it shall be so,
A preparation I have set of foot,
Worthy the friendship and the same of Caesar,
My Sisters favours shall seem poor and withered:
Nay she her self, (trimmed up in all her beauties)
Compared to what I'll take his eyes with all,
Shall be a dream.
Do you mean to show the glory,
And wealth of Egypt?
Yes: and in that lustre,
Rome shall appear in all her famous Conquests,
And all her riches of no note unto it.
Now you are reconcilde to your fair Sister,
Take heed Sir, how you step into a danger:
A danger of this praecipice: but note sir,
For what Rome ever raised her mighty armies?
First for ambition: then for wealth: it is madness,
Nay more, a secure impotence, to tempt
An armed Guest: feed not an eye, that conquers,
Nor teach a fortunate sword the way to be coveteous.
Ye judge a miss: and far to wide to alter me,
Y???t all he ready, as I gave direction:
The secret way of all our wealth appearing
Newly, and handsomely: and all about it:
No more dissuading: it is my will.
I grieve for it.
I will dazzle Caesar, with excess of glory.
I fear you'll curse your will we must obey ye 
I wonder at the glory of this Kingdom,
And the most bounteous preparation,
Still as I pass, they Court me with.
I'll tell ye:
In Gaul, and Germany, we saw such visions,
And stood not to admire 'em, but possess em.
When they are ours, they are worth our admiration.
The young Queen comes: give room.
Welcome (my dearest)
Come bless my side.
I mary: here's a wonder,
As she appears now, I am no true Soldier,
If I be not readiest to recant.
Be merry Sir,
My brother will be proud to do you honour
That now appears himself.
Hail to great Caesar
My Royal Guest, first I will feast thine eyes
With wealthy Aegypts store??? and then thy palate
And waite my self upon thee. 
What rich Service?
What mines of treasure? richer still?
My Caesar,
What do you admire? pray ye turn, and let me talk to ye.
Have ye forgot me Sir? how, a new object?
Am I grown old of the sudden? Caesar?
Tell me
From whence comes all this wealth?
Is your eye that way?
And all my Beauties banished?
I'll tell thee Caesar,
We owe for all this wealth to the old Nylus:
We need no dropping rain to cheer the husband-man,
Nor Merchant that ploughs up the Sea, to seek us;
Within the wealthy womb of reverent Nylus,
All this is nourished: who to do thee honour,
Comes to discover his seven Deities,
(His concealed heads) unto thee: see with pleasure
The matchless wealth of this Land!
Come, ye shall hear.
Away: let me imagine,
How? frown on me?
The eyes of Caesar wrapped in storms?
I am sorry:
But let me think???
Ices, the Goddess of this Land,
Bids thee (great Caesar) understand
And mark our Customs, and first know,
With greedy eyes these watch the flow
Of plenteous Nylus: when he comes,
With Songs, with Dances, Timbrels, Drums,
They entertain him: cut his way,
And give his proud Heads leave to play:
Nylus himself, shall rise, and show
His matchless wealth in Over-flow.
COme let us help the reverend Nyle,
Hoe's very old (alas the while)
Let us dig him easy ways,
And prepare a thousand Plays:
To delight his streams let's sing,
Aloud welcome to our Spring.
This way let his curling Heads,
Fall into our new made Beds.
This way let his wanton spawns,
Frisk, and glide it o'er the Lawns.
This way profit comes, and gain:
How he tumbles here amain.
How his waters hast to fall
Into our Channels? Labour all
And let him in: Let Nylus flow,
And perpetual plenty show.
With Incense let us bless the brim,
And as the wanton fishes swim
Let us Gums, and Garlands fling,
And loud our Timbrels ring.
Come (old Father) come away,
Our labour is our holy-day.
HEre comes the aged River now
With Garlands of great Pearl, his Brow
Begirt and rounded: In his Flow,
All things take life; and all things grow.
A thousand wealthy Treasures still,
To doe him service at his will,
Follow his rising Flood, and power
Perpetual blessings in our store.
Hear him: and next there will advance,
His sacred: Heads to tread a Dance,
In honour of my Royal Guest,
Marks them too: and you have a Feast.
A little dross betray me?
I am ashamed I warred at home, (my friends)
When such wealth may be got abroad? what honour?
Nay everlasting glory had Rome purchased,
Had she a just cause but to visit Egypt?
MAke room for my rich waters fall,
and bless my Flood,
Nylus comes flowing, to you all
increase and good.
Now the Plants and Flowers shall spring,
And the merry Plough-man sing.
In my hidden waves I bring,
Bread, and wine, and every thing.
Let the Damsels sing me in:
Sing aloud that I may rise:
Your holy Feasts and hours begin,
And each hand bring a Sacrifice.
Now my wanton Pearls I show
That to Ladies fair necks grow.
Now my gold
And treasures that can ne'er be told,
Shall bless this Land, by my rich Flow,
And after this, to crown your Eyes,
My hidden holy head arise.
The wonder of this wealth, so troubles me,
I am not well: good-night.
I am glad ye have it:
Now we shall stir again.
Thou wealth, still haunt him.
A greedy spirit set thee on: we are happy.
Lights: lights for Caesar, and attendance.
Well,
I shall yet find a time to tell thee Caesar,
Thou hast wronged her Love: the rest here.
Lights along still:
Music, and Sacrifice to sleep for, Caesar. 
I Told ye carefully, what this would prove to,
What this inestimable wealth and glory
Would draw upon ye: I advised your Majesty
Never to tempt a Conquering Guest: nor add
A bait, to catch a mind, bent by his Trade
To make the whole world his.
I was not heard Sir:
Or what I said, lost, and contemned: I dare say,
(And freshly now) it was a poor weakness in ye,
A glorious Childishness: I watched his eye,
And saw how Faulcon-like it towr'd, and flew
Upon the wealthy Quarry: how round it mack'd it:
I observed his words, and to what it tended;
How greedily he asked from whence it came,
And what Commerce we held for such abundance:
The show of Nylus, how he laboured at
To find the secret ways: the Song delivered.
He never smiled I noted at the pleasures:
But fixed his constant eyes upon the treasure;
I doe not think his ears had so much leisure
After the wealth appeared, to hear the Musique?
Most sure he has not slept since, his minds troubld
With objects they would make their own still labour.
Your sister he ne'er gazed on; that's a main note,
The prime beauty of the world had no power over him.
Where was his mind the whilst?
Where was your carefulness
To show an armed thief the way to rob ye:
Nay, would you give him this, twill excite him
To seek the rest. Ambition feels no gift,
Nor knows no bounds indeed: ye have done most weakly.
Can I be too kind to my noble friend?
To be unkind unto your noble self, but savours
Of indiscretion, and your friend has found it.
Had ye been trained up in the wants and miseries
A soldier marches through: and known his temperance
In offered courtesies, you wovld have made
A wiser Mastet of your own, and stronger.
Why should I give him all, he would return it?
It is more to him, to make Kings.
Pray thee be wiser,
And trust not with your lost wealth, your loved liberty,
To be a King still at your own discretion:
Is like a King; to be at his a vassal.
Now take good council, or no more take to ye
The freedom of a Prince.
Twill be too late else:
For, since the Masque, he sent three of his Captains
(Ambitious as himself) to view again
The glory of your wealth.
The next himself comes,
Not staying for your curtsy, and takes it.
What counsel my Achoreus?
I'll go pray Sir,
(For that is best counsel now) the gods may help ye. 
I found ye out a way but it was not credited,
????????? secure way; whether will ye fly now?
For when your wealth is gone, your power must ??????l???ow.
And that diminished also, what's your life worth?
???ho would regard it?
You say true.
What eye
???ill look upon King Ptolomy? If they do look,
It must be in scorn:
????????? a poor King is a monster;
???hat ear remember ye? twill be then a curtsy,
???A noble one) to take your life too from ye:
But if reserved, you stand to fill a victory,
As who knows Conquerors minds? though outwardly
They bear fair streams.
O Sir, does this not shake ye?
If to be honeyed on to these afflictions???
I never will: I was a Fool.
For then Sir
Your Countries cause falls with ye too, and fetterd:
All Egypt shall be ploughed up with dishonour.
No more: I am sensible: and now my spirit
Burns hot within me.
Keep it warm and fiery.
And last be counsaild.
I will, though I perish.
Go in: we'll tell you all: and then we'll execute.
You are so impatient.
Have I not cause?
Women of common Beauties, and low Births,
When they are slighted, are allowed their angers,
Why should not I (a Princess) make him know
The baseness of his usage.
Yes: it is fit:
But then again you know what man.
He is no man:
The shadow of a Greatness hangs upon him,
And not the virtue: he is no Conqueror,
He has suffered under the base dross of Nature:
Poorly delivered up his power to wealth,
(The god of bed-rid men) taught his eyes treason
Against the truth or love: he has raised rebellion:
defid'e his holy flames.
He will fall back again,
And satisfy your Grace.
Had I been old,
Or blasted in my bud, he might have showed
Some shadow of dislike: But, to prefer
The lustre of a little art, (Arsino)
And the poor glowworm light of some faint Jewels,
Before the life of Love, and soul of Beauty,
Oh how it vexes me: he is no Soldier,
(All honourable soldiers are Lovers servants)
He is a Merchant: a mere wandering Merchant,
Servile to gain: he trades for poor Commodities,
And makes his Conquests, thefts; some fortunate Captains
That quarter with him, and are truly valiant,
Have hung the name of happy Caesar on him,
Himself ne'er won it: he is so base and covetous,
He will sell his sword for gold.
This is too bitter.
Oh I could curse my self, that was so foolish,
So fondly childish to believe his tongue,
His promising tongue, ere I could catch his temper,
I had trash enough to have cloyed his eyes withal:
His covetous eyes; such as I scorn to tread on:
Richer then ere he saw yet, and more tempting;
Had I known he had stooped at that, I had saved mine honour,
I had been happy still: but let him take it,
And let him brag how poorly I am rewarded:
Let him go conquer still weak wretched Ladies:
Love has his angry Quiver too, his deadly,
And when he finds scorn, armed at the strongest:
I am a fool to fret thus, for a fool:
An old blind fool too? I lose my health: I will not
I will not cry: I will not honour him,
With tears diviner then the gods he worships:
I will not take the pains to curse a poor thing.
Dye not: you shall not need.
Would I were prisoner
To one I hate, that I might anger him,
I will love any man, to break the heart of him:
Any, that has the heart and will to kill him.
Take some fair truce.
I will go study mischief,
And put a look on, armed with all my cunnings,
Shall meet him like a Basilisk, and strike him:
Love, put destroying flames into mine eyes,
Into my smiles, deceits, that I may torture him,
That I may make him love to death, and laugh at him.
Caesar commends his Service to your Grace.
His service? what's his service?
Pray ye be patient,
The noble Caesar loves still.
What's his will?
He craves access unto your Highness
No:
Say no: I will have none to trouble me.
Good Sister:
None I say: I will be private.
Would thou had flung me into Nylus (keeper)
When first thou give consent, to bring my body
To this unthankful Caesar.
It was your will (Madam)
Nay more: your charge upon me, as I honoured ye:
You know what danger I endured.
Take this,
And carry it to that Lordly Caesar sent thee:
There's a new Love, a handsome one: a rich one:
One that will hug his mind: bid him make love to it:
Tell the ambitious Broker, this will suffer???
He enters.
How?
I doe not use to waite (Lady)
Where I am, all the doors are free, and open.
I guess so, by your rudeness.
Ye are not angry?
Things of your tender mold, should be most gentle;
Why doe you frown? good gods, what a set-anger
Have you forced into your face? Come, I must temper ye:
What a coy smile was there, and a disdainful?
How like an ominous flash it broke out from ye?
Defend me (Love) Sweet, who has angered ye?
Show him a glass; that false face has betrayed me:
That base heart wrought me???
Be more sweetly angry;
I wronged ye fair?
Away with your foul flatteries:
They are too gross: but that I dare be angry,
And with as great a god as Caesar is,
To show how poorly I respect his memory,
I would not speak to ye.
Pray ye undo this riddle,
And tell me how I have vexed ye?
Let me think first
Whether I may put on a Patience
That will with honour suffer me: know, I hate ye,
Let that begin the story: Now I'll tell ye.
But do it milder: In a noble Lady,
Softness of spirit, and a sober nature,
That moves like summer winds, cool: and blows sweetness;
Shows blessed like her self.
And that great blessedness
You first reaped of me, till you taught my nature
Like a rude storm to talk aloud, and thunder
Sleep was not gentler to my soul, and stiller;
You had the Spring of my affections:
And my fair fruits I gave you leave to taste of:
You must expect the winter of mine anger:
You flung me off, before the Court disgraced me,
When in the pride I appeared of all my beauty,
Appeared your Mistress; took into your eyes
The common-strumpet love of hated lucre,
Courted with covetous heart, the slave of nature,
Gave all your thought to gold: that men of glory,
And minds adorned with noble love, would kick at:
Soldiers of royal mark, scorn such base purchase:
Beauty and honour are the marks they shoot at;
I spake to ye then; I courted ye, and wooed ye:
Called ye dear Caesar, hung about ye tenderly:
Was proud to appear your friend.
You have mistaken me.
But neither Eye, nor Favour, not a Smile
Was I blessed back; but shook off rudely,
And, as ye had been sold to sordid infamy,
You fell before the Images of treasure,
And in your soul you worshipped: I stood slighted,
Forgotten and contemned; my soft embraces,
And those sweet kisses you called Elizium,
As letters writ in sand, no more remembered?
The name and glory of your Cleopatra
Laughed at, and made a story to your Captains:
Shall I endure?
You are deceived in all this,
Upon my life you are, it is your much tenderness.
No, no, I love not that way; you are cozened:
I love with as much ambition as a Conqueror,
And where I love, will triumph.
So you shall:
My heart shall be the Chariot that shall bear ye,
All I have won shall waite upon ye: By the gods
The bravery of this women's mind, has fired me:
Dear Mistress shall I but this night????
How Caesar?
Have I let slip a second vanity
That give thee hope?
You shall be absolute,
And Reign alone as Queen: you shall be any thing.
Make me a maid again, and then I'll hear thee;
Examine all thy art of War, to doe that;
And if thou find it possible, I'll love thee:
Till when, farewell, unthankful.
Stay.
I will not.
I command.
Command, and go without, Sir.
I doe command thee be my slave for ever,
And vex while I laugh at thee.
Thus low, beauty?
It is too late; when I have found thee absolute,
The man that Fame reports thee, and to me:
May be I shall think better. Farewell Conqueror. 
She mocks me too: I will enjoy her Beauty:
I will not be denied; He force my longing.
Love is best pleased, when roundly we compel him,
And as he is Imperious, so will I be.
Stay fool, and be advised: that dulls the appetite;
Takes of the strength and sweetness of delight.
By heaven she is a miracle, I must use
A handsome way to win: how now? what fear
Dwells in your faces? you look all distracted.
If it be fear, it is fear of your undoing?
Not of ourselves: fear of your poor declining:
Our lives and deaths are equal benefits,
And we make louder prayers to dye nobly,
Then to live high, and wantonly: whilst you are secure here,
And offer Heccatombs of lazy kisses
To the lewd god of Love, and cowardice,
And most lasciviously dye in delights,
You are begirt with the fierce Alexandrians,
The spawn of Egypt, flow about your Palace,
Armed all: and ready to assault.
Led on
By the false and base Photinus and his Ministers;
No stirring out; no peeping through a loop-hole,
But straight saluted with an armed Dart.
No parley: they are deaf to all but danger,
They swear they will flea us, and then dry our Quarters:
A rasher of a salt lover, is such a Shooing-horne:
Can you kiss away this conspiracy, and set us free?
Or will the Giant god of love, fight for ye?
Will his fierce war-like bow kill a Cock-sparrow?
Bring out the Lady, she can qual this mutiny:
And with her powerful looks, strike awe into them:
She can destroy, and build again the City,
Your Goddesses have mighty gifts: show 'em her fair breasts,
The impregnable Bulwarks of proud Love, and let 'em
Begin their battery there: she will laugh at 'em;
They are not above a hundred thousand, Sir.
A mist, a mist, that when her Eyes break out,
Her powerful radiant eyes, and shake their flashes,
Will fly before her heats.
Begirt with Villains?
They come to play you, and your Love a Huntsup
You were told what this same whoreson winching, long ago would come too:
You are taken napping now: has not a soldier
A time to kiss his friend, and a time to consider,
But he must lye still digging, like a Pioner,
Making of mines, and burying of his honour there?
It were good you would think???
And time too, or you will find else
A harder task, then Courting a coy Beauty.
Look out and then believe.
No, no, hang danger:
Take me provoking broth, and then go to her:
Go to your Love, and let her feel your valour;
Charge her whole body, when the sword's in your throat (Sir,)
You may cry, Caesar, and see if that will help ye.
I'll be my self again, and meet their furies,
Meet, &amp; consume their mischiefs: make some shift (Sceva)
To recover the Fleet, and bring me up two Legions,
And you shall see me, how I'll break like thunder
Amongst these beds of slimy Eels, and scatter 'em.
Now ye speak sense: I'll put my life to the hazard
Before I go. No more of this warm Lady,
She will spoil your sword-hand.
Go: come, lets to Council
How to prevent, and then to execute.
Did ye see this Penitence?
Yes: I saw, and heard it.
And I too: looke'd upon him, and observed it,
Hoe's the strangest Septinius now???
I heard he was altered,
And had given away his Gold to honest uses:
Cried monstrously.
He cries abundantly:
He is blind almost with weeping.
It is most wonderful
That a hard hearted man, and an old Soldier
Should have so much kind moisture: when his mother died
He laughed aloud, and made the wickedst Ballads???
It is like enough: he never loved his Parents;
Nor can I blame him, for they near loved him.
His mother dreamed before she was delivered
That she was brought abed with a Buzzard, and ever after
She whistled him up to th'world, his brave clothes too
He has flung away: and goes like one of us now:
Walks with his hands in's pockets, poor and sorrowful,
And gives the best instructions. ???
And tells stories
Of honest and good people that were honoured,
And how they were remembered: and runs mad
If he but hear of any ungrateful person,
A bloody, or betraying man???
If it be possible
That an Arch-Villain may ever be recovered,
This penitent Rascal will put hard: it were worth our labour
To see him once again.
He spares us that labour
For here he comes.
??? Bless ye my honest friends,
Bless ye from base unworthy men; come not near me:
For I am yet too taking for your company.
Did I not tell ye?
What booke's that?
No doubt
Some excellent Salve for a sore heart, are you
Septinius, that base knave, that betrayed Pompey?
I was, and am; unless your honest thoughts
Will look upon my penitence, and save me
I must be ever Villain: O good Soldiers
You that have Roman hearts, take heed of falsehood:
Take heed of blood; take heed of foul ingratitude,
The Gods have scarce a mercy for those mischiefs,
Take heed of pride, it was that that brought me to it.
This fellow would make a rare speech at the gallows
It is very fit he were hanged to edify us:
Let all your thoughts be humble, and obedient,
Love your Commanders, honour them that feed ye:
Pray, that ye may be strong in honesty
As in the use of arms; Labour, and diligently
To keep your hearts from ease, and her base issues;
Pride, and ambitious wantonness, those spoiled me:
Rather loose all your limbs, then the least honesty,
You are never lame indeed, till loss of credit
Benum ye through: Scars, and those maims of honour
Are memorable crutches, that shall bear
When you are dead, your noble names to Eternity.
I cry.
And so doe I.
An excellent villain.
A more sweet pious knave, I never heard yet.
He was happy he was Rascal, to come to this
Who's this? a Priest?
O stay, most holy Sir!
And by the Gods of Egypt, I conjure ye,
(Ices, and great Osiris) pity me,
Pity a laden man, and tell me truly
With what most humble Sacrifice I may
Wash off my sin, and appease the powers that hate me?
Take from my heart those thousand thousand furies,
That restless gnaw upon my life, and save me?
Orestes bloody hands fell on his Mother,
Yet, at the holy altar he was pardoned.
Orestes out of madness did his murder,
And therefore he found grace: thou (worst of all men)
Out of cold blood, and hope of gain, base lucre,
Slewst thine own Feeder: come not near the altar,
Nor with thy reeking hands pollute the Sacrifice,
Thou art marked for shame eternal. 
Look all on me,
And let me be a story left to time
Of blood and Infamy, how base and ugly
Ingratitude appears, with all her profits,
How monstrous, my hoped grace, at Court? good soldiers
Let neither flattery, nor the witching sound
Of high and soft preferment, touch your goodness:
To be valiant, old, and honest, O what blessedness???
Dost thou want any thing?
Nothing but your prayers:
Be thus, and let the blind Priest do his worst,
We have gods as well as they, and they will hear us.
Come, cry no more: thou hast wept out twenty Pompeyes.
So penitent?
It seems so.
Yet for all this
We must employ him.
These are the armed Souldier-leaders:
Away: and let's tot'h Fort, we shall be snapped else. 
How now? why thus? what cause of this dejection?
Why dost thou weep?
Pray leave me, you have ruined me,
You have made me a famous Villain.
Does that touch thee?
He will be hard to win: he feels his lewdness,
He must be won, or we shall want our right hand.
This fellow dares, and knows, and must be heartened,
Art thou so poor to blench at what thou hast done?
Is Conscience a comrade for an old soldier?
It is not that: it may be some disgrace
That be takes heavily; and would be cherished,
Septinius ever scorned to show such weakness.
Let me alone; I am not for your purpose,
I am no wa new man.
We have new affairs for thee
Those that would raise thy head.
I would it were off,
And in your bellies for the love you bear me.
I'll be no more Knave: I have stings enough
Already in my breast.
Thou shalt be noble:
And who dares think then that thou art not honest?
Thou shalt command in Chief, all our strong Forces
And if thou serve an use, must not all justify it?
I am Rogue enough.
Thou wilt be more, and baser:
A poor Rogue is all rogues: open to all shames:
Nothing to shadow him: dost thou think crying
Can keep thee from the censure of the Multitude?
Or to be kneeling at the altar save thee?
It is poor and servile:
Were thou thine own Sacrifice
It would seem so low, people would spit the fire out.
Keep thy self glorious still, though ne'er so stained,
And that will lessen it, if not work it out
To go complaining thus: and thus repenting
Like a poor Girl that had betrayed her maiden-head???
I'll stop mine ears.
Will show so in a soldier,
So simply, and so ridicolously, so tamely???
If people would believe thee, it were some honesty,
And for thy penitence would not laugh at thee
(As sure they will) and beat thee, for thy poverty:
If they would allow thy foolery, there were some hope.
My foolery?
Nay, more then that, thy misery,
Thy monstrous misery.
He begins to hearken:
Thy misery so great, men will not bury thee.
That this were true!
Why does this conquering Caesar
Labour through the worlds deep Seas of toils &amp; troubles,
Dangers, and desperate hopes? to repent afterwards?
Why does he slaughter thousands in a Battle,
And whip his Country with the Sword? to cry sor't?
Thou killdst great Pompey: he will kill all his kindred,
And justify it: nay raise up Trophies to it,
When thou hear him repent: (he's held most holy too)
And cry for doing daily bloody murders,
Take thou example, and go ask forgiveness,
Call up the thing thou nam'st thy conscience,
And let it work: then twill seem well Septinius.
He does all this.
Yes: and is honoured for it;
Nay called the honoured Caesar, so moist thou be:
Thou were born as near a Crown as he.
He was poor.
And desperate bloody tricks got him this credit.
I am afraid you will once more???
Help to raise thee:
Off with thy pining black, it dulls a Soldier,
And put on resolution like a man,
A noble Fate waits on thee.
I now feel
My self returning Rascal speedily.
O that I had the power???
Thou shalt have all:
And doe all through thy power, men shall admire thee,
And the vices of Septinius, shall turn virtues.
Off: off: thou must off: off my cowardice,
Puling repentance off.
Now thou speak nobly.
Off my dejected looks: and welcome impudence:
My daring shall be Deity, to save me:
Give me instructions, and put action on me:
A glorious cause upon my swords point (Gentlemen)
And let my wit, and valour work: you will raise me,
And make me out-dare all my miseries?
All this, and all thy wishes.
Use me then,
Womanish fear farewell: I'll never melt more,
Lead on, to some great thing, to weal my spirit:
I cut the Cedar Pompey, and I'll fell
This huge Oak Caesar too.
Now thou sing sweetly:
And Ptolomy shall crown thee for thy service: 
He's well wrought: put him on apace for cooling.
THe tumult still increases.
O my fortune!
My lu??????full folly rather! but it is well,
And worthily I am made a bondmans prey,
That after all my glorious victories,
In which I passed so many seas of dangers:
When all the Elements conspired against me,
Would yield up the dominion of this head
To any mortal power; so blind and stupid:
To trust these base Egyptians, that proclaimed
Their per???uries, in noble Pompeys death,
And yet that could not warn me.
Be still, Caesar,
Who ever loved to exercise his fate,
Where danger looked most dreadful.
If you fall,
Fall not alone: let the King and his Sister
Be buried in your ruins: on my life
They both are guilty: reason may assure you
Photinus nor Achillas durst attempt you,
Or shake one Dart, or Sword, aimed at your safety,
Without their warrant.
For the young King I know not
How he may be missed; but for his Sister
(Unequalled Cleopatra) it were a kind
Of blasphemy to doubt her: ugly treason
Durst never dwell in such a glorious building,
Nor can so clear and great a spirit, as hers is,
Admit of falsehood.
Let us seize on him then:
And leave her to her fortune.
If he have power
Use it to your security, and let
His honesty acquit him; if he be face,
It is too great an honour he should dye
By your victorious hand.
He comes: and I
Shall do as I find cause.
Let not great Caesar
Impute the breach of hospitality,
To you (my guest) to me; I am contemned,
And my rebellious subjects lift their hands
Against my head: and would they aimed no farther,
Provided that I fell a sacrifice
To gain you safety: that this is not feigned,
The boldness of my innocence may confirm you:
Had I bin privy to their bloody plot,
I now had led them on, and given fair gloss
To their bad cause, by being present with them:
But I that yet taste of the punishment,
In being false to Pompey, will not make
A second fault to Caesar uncompelled
With such as have not yet shook off obedience,
I yield my self to you, and will take part
In all your dangers.
This pleads your excuse,
And I receive it.
If they have any touch,
Of justice, or religion, I will use
The athority of our Gods, to call them back,
From their bad purpose.
This part of the palace,
Is yet defensible: we may make it good,
Till your powers rescue us.
Caesar besieged?
Ostaine to my great actions: it was my custom
An Army routed, as my feet had wings
To be first in the chase: nor walls, nor Bulworkes
Could guard those that escaped the Battles fury
From this strong Arm, and I to be enclosed
My heart! my hart! but it is necessity,
To which the Gods must yield, and I obey,
'Till I redeem it, by some glorious way. 
Ther's no retiring now, we are broke in:
The deed past hope of pardon: if we prosper
A will be stilt lawful, and we shall give laws
To those that now command us: stop not at
Or loyalty, or duty, bold Ambition,
To dare and power to do, gave the first difference
Between the King, and subject, Caesars Motto,
Aut Caesar aut Nihil, each of us must claim,
And use it as our own.
The deed is bloody
If we conclude in Ptolemies death.
The better
The globe of Empire must be so manure.
Rome, that from Romulus first took her name
Had her walls watered with a Crimson shower
Draind from a Brothers heart: nor was she raised
To this prodigious height, that overlooks
Three full parts of the Earth, that pay her tribute,
But by enlarging of her narrow bounds
By the Sack of Neighbour Cities, were made hers
Till they were Cemented with the Blood of those
That did possess 'em: Caesar, Ptolomy,
(Now I am steeld) to me are empty names
Esteemed as Pompeys was.
Well said Septinius,
Thou now art right again.
But what course take we
For the Princess Cleopatra?
Let her live
A while to make us sport: she shall authorize
Our undertakings to the ignorant people,
As if what we do were by her command:
But our triumvirate Government once confirmed,
She bears her Brother company, that's my Province:
Leave me to work her.
I will undertake
For Ptolomy.
Caesar shall be my task,
And as in Pompey I began a names
I'll perfect it in Caesar.
It is resolved then
We'll force our passage.
See: they do appear
As they desired a parley.
I am proud yet
I have brought them to capitulate.
Now Photinus?
Now Ptolomy?
No addition?
We are equal,
Though Caesars name were put into the scale,
In which our worth is weight.
Presumptuous Villain,
Upon what grounds hast thou presumed to raise
Thy servile hand against the King, or me,
That have a greater name?
On those, by which
Thou did presume to pass the Rubicon
Against the Laws of Rome; and at the name
Of traitor smile, as thou did when Marcellus
The Consul, with the Sonnets full consent
Pronounced thee for an enemy to thy Country,
Yet thou went on, and thy rebellious Cause
Was crowned with fair success: why should we fear then?
Think on that Caesar.
O the gods! be braved thus?
And be compelled to bear this from a slave
That would not brooke great Pompey his Superior?
Thy glories now have touched the highest point,
And must descend.
Despair, and think we stand
The Champions of Rome, to wreak her wrongs
Upon whose liberty thou hast set thy foot.
And that the ghosts of all those noble Romans
That by thy sword fell in this Civil war,
Expect revenge.
Dare thou speak, and remember
There was a Pompey?
There is no hope to scope us:
If that against the odds we have upon you
You dare come forth and fight, receive the honour
To dye, like Romans, if ye faint, resolve
To starve, like wretches: I disdain to change 
Another syllable with you.
Let us dye nobly:
And rather fall upon each others sword
Then come into these villains hands.
That Fortune
Which to this hour hath been a friend to Caesar,
Though for a while she cloth her brow with frowns
Will smile again upon me; who will pay her,
Or sacrifice or vows, if she forsake
Her best of works in me? or suffer him
Whom, with a strong hand she hath led triumphant
Through the whole Western world, &amp; Rome acknowledgd
Her Sovereign Lord, to end in gloriously,
A life admired by all? the threatened danger
Must by a way more horrid, be avoided,
And I will run the hazard: Fire the Palace,
And the rich Magazines that neighbour it,
In which the wealth of Egypt is contained:
Start not, it shall be so; that while the people
Labour in quenching the ensuing flames,
Like Caesar, with this handful of my friends
Through fire, and swords, I force a passage to
My conquering Legions. King, if thou dare follow
Where Caesar leads, or live, or dye a Free-man;
If not, stay here a bond-man to thy slave,
And dead, be thought unworthy of a grave. 
I feel my resolution melts again,
And that I am not knave alone, but fool
In all my purposes. This Devil Photinus
Employs me, as a property, and grown useless
Will shake me off again: he told me so
When I killed Pompey: nor can I hope better
When Caesar is dispatched: Services done
For such as only study their own ends,
Too great to be rewarded, or returned
With deadly hate: I learned this principle
In his own School: yet still he fools me: well:
And yet he trusts me; Since I in my nature
Was fashioned to be false, wherefore should I
That killed my General, and a Roman, one
To whom I owe all nourishments of life
Be true to an Egyptian? to save Caesar,
And turn Photinus plots on his own head,
As it is in my power, redeem my credit,
And live, to lye, and swear again in fashion,
Oh, it were a Master-piece? ha? ??? me Caesar,
How's he got off?
The fire has took,
And shows the City, like a second Troy,
The Navy too is scorched, the people greedy
To save their wealth, and houses, while their soldiers
Make spoil of all: only Achillas troops
Make good their guard: break through them, we are safe:
I'll lead you like a Thunder-bolt.
Stay Caesar.
Who's this? the dog Septinius?
Cut his throat.
You barked but now, fawn you so soon?
O hear me,
What I'll deliver is for Caesars safety,
For all your good.
Good from a month like thine,
That never belch'd but blasphemy &amp; treason, on Festival days
I am an altered man: altered indeed,
And I will give you cause to say I am a Roman.
Rogue, I grant thee.
Trust me, I'll make the passage smooth and easy,
For your escape.
I'll trust the Devil sooner,
And make a safer bargain.
I am trusted,
With all Photinus secrets.
There's no doubt then,
Thou wilt be false.
Still to be true to you.
And very likely.
Be brief, the means?
Thus Caesar:
To me alone, but bound by terrible oaths
Not to discover it, he hath revealed
A dismal vault, whose dreadful mouth do's open
A mile beyond the City: in this cave
Lye but two hours concealed.
If you believe him,
He will bury us alive.
I'll fly in the ayre first.
Then in the dead of night, I'll bring you back
Into a private room, where you shall find
Photinus, and Achillas, and the rest
Of their Commanders, close at Counsel.
Good: what follows?
Fall me fairly on their throats,
Their heads cut off and shorn, the multitude
Will easily disperse.
O Devil! away with him:
Nor true to friend nor enemy? Caesar scorns
To find his safety, or revenge his wrongs
So base a way: or owe the means of life
To such a leprous Traitor. I have towr'd
For victory like a Falcon in the clouds,
Not dug for it like a Moil: our Swords, and Cause
Make way for us; and that it may appear
We took a noble course, and hate base Treason,
Some soldiers, that would merit Caesars favour,
Hang him on yonder turret, and then follow
The lane, this sword makes for you. 
Here's a Belt,
Though I dye for it I'll use it.
Tic too good
To truss a Cur in.
Save me, here's gold.
If Rome
Were offered for thy ransom, it could not help thee.
Hang not an arse.
Goad him on with thy sword:
Thou dost deserve a worser end; and may
All such conclude so, that their friends betray.
We are lost.
Undone.
Confusion, Fire, and Swords,
And fury in the soldiers face, more horrid
Circle us round.
The Kings command they laugh at,
And jeer at Caesars threats.
My brother seizd on
By the Roman, as thought guilty of the tumult,
And forced to bear him company, as marked out
For his protection, or revenge.
They have broke
Into my Cabinet: my Trunks are ransak'd.
I have lost my Jewels too; but thats the least:
The barbarous Rascals, against all humanity,
Or sense of pity, have killed my little dog,
And broke my monkeys chain.
They rufled me:
But that I could endure, and tire 'em too,
Would they proceed no further.
O my sister!
My Queen, my Mistress!
Can you stand unmoved
When an Earth-quake of rebellion shakes the City?
And the Court trembles?
Yes Arsino,
And with a masculine constancy deride
Fortunes worst malice, as a servant to
My Virtues, not a Mistress: then we forsake
The strong fort of our selves, when we once yield,
Or shrink at her assaults; I am still my self,
And though dis-roab'd of Sovereignty, and ravished
Of ceremonious duty, that attends it,
Nay, grant they had slaved my body, my free mind
Like to the Palm-tree, walling fruitful Nyle,
Shall grow up straighter, and enlarge it self
Spite of the envious weight that loads it with:
Think of thy birth (Arsino) common burdens
Fit common shoulders; teach the multitude
By suffering nobly what they fear to touch at:
The greatness of thy mind does soar a pitch,
Their dim eyes (darkened by their narrow souls)
Cannot arrive at.
I am new created,
And owe this second being to you (best sister)
For now I feel you have infused into me
Part of your fortitude.
I still am fearful:
I dare not tell a lye: you that were born
Daughters, and Sisters unto Kings, may nourish
Great thoughts, which I, that am your humble handmaid
Must not presume to rival.
Yet (my Eros)
Though thou hast profited nothing, by observing
The whole course of my life, learn in my death,
Though not to equal, yet to imitate
Thy fearless Mistress.
O, a man in arms?
His weapon drawn too?
Though upon the point
Death sate, I'll meet it, and out-dare the danger.
Keep the watch strong, and guard the passage sure
That leads unto the Sea.
What sea of rudeness
Breaks in upon us? or what Subjects breath
Dare raise a storm, when we command a calm?
Are duty, and obedience fled to heaven,
And in their room, ambition and pride
Sent into Aegyt? that face speaks thee Photinus,
A thing thy Mother brought into the world:
My Brothers, and my Slave: but thy behaviour,
Opposed to that an insolent Intruder
Upon that Sovereignty thou should bow to,
If in the gulf of base ingratitude,
All loyalty to Ptolomy the King
Be swallowed up, remember who I am,
Whose Daughter, and whose Sister: or suppose
That is forgot too; let the name of Caesar
Which Nations quake at, stop the desperate madness
From running headong on to thy confusion.
Throw from thee quickly those rebellious arms,
Tnd let me read submission in thine eyes,
Ahy wrongs to us, we will not only pardon,
But be a ready advocate, to plead for thee
To Caesar, and my Brother.
Plead my pardon?
To you I bow, but scorn as much to stoop thus
To Ptolomy, to Caesar? Nay the gods,
As to put off the figure of a man,
And change my Essence, with a sensual beast:
All my designs, my counsels, and dark ends
Were aimed to purchase you.
How durst thou, being
The scorn of baseness, nourish such a thought?
They that have power are royal: and those base
That live at the devotion of an other,
What birth gave Ptolomy, or fortune Caesar,
By Engines fashiond in this Protean Anvil
I have made mine: and only stoop at you,
Whom I would still preserve free to command me;
For Caesars frowns, they are below my thoughts,
And but in these fair eyes, I still have read
The story of a supreme Monarchy,
To which all hearts with mine, gladly pay tribute,
Photinus name, had long since bin as great
As Ptolemies ere was, or Caesars is,
This made me as a weaker tie to unloose
The knot of loyalty, that chained my freedom;
And slight the fear that Caesars threats might cause,
That I and they might see no Sun appear
But Cleopatra, in the Egyptian Sphere.
O giantlike Ambition! married to
Cymerian darkness! in considerate fool,
(Though flattered with self love) coldest thou believe,
Were all Crowns on the earth, made into one,
And that (by Kings) set on thy head: all Scepters,
Within thy grasp, and laid down at my feet,
I would vouchsafe a kiss to a no-man?
A gilded Evenuch?
Fairest, that makes for me:
And shows it is no sensual appetite,
But true love to the greatness of thy spirit,
That when that you are mine shall yield me pleasures:
Hymen, though blessing a new married pair
Shall blush to think on, and our certain Issue,
The glorious splendour of dread Majesty:
Whose beams shall dazzle Rome, and awe the world:
My wants in that kind, others shall supply,
And I give way to it.
Baser then thy birth:
Can there be Gods, and hear this, and no thunder,
Ram thee into the earth?
They are a sleep,
And cannot hear thee:
Or with open eyes,
Did Jove look on us, I would laugh and swear
That his artillery is cloid by me:
Or if that they have power to hurt, his Bolts
Are in my hand.
Most impious!
They are dreams,
Religious fools shake at: yet to assure thee,
If Nemesis, that scourges pride, and scorn,
Be any thing but a name she lives in me:
For by my self (an oath to me more dreadful
Then Styx is to your Gods) weak Ptolomy dead,
And Caesar (both being in my toil) removed
The poorest Rascals, that are in my Camp
Shall, in my presence, quench their Iustfull heate
In thee, and young Arsinoe; while I laugh
To hear you howl in vain:
I deride those Gods,
That you think can protect you,
To prevent thee,
In that I am the Mistress of my fate:
So hope I of my Sister, to confirm it,
I spit at thee, and scorn thee.
I will tame,
That haughty courage, and make it stoop too.
Never:
I was borne to command and I will dye so.
The King dead? this is a fair entrance to,
Our future happiness.
O my Dear Brother?
Weep not Arsinoe, common women do so,
Nor loose a tear for him, it cannot help him:
But study to dye nobly.
Caesar fled?
It is deadly aconite to my cold heart:
It chokes my vital spirits: where was your care?
Did the guards sleep?
He roused them with his sword:
We talk of Mars, but I am sure his courage
Admits of no comparison but it self,
And (as inspired by him) his following friends
With such a confidence, as you Eaglets prey
Under the large wing of their fiercer dam,
Brake through our troops, and scattered 'em, he went on:
But still pursued by us: when on the sudden,
He turned his head, and from his eyes flew terror;
Which struck in us no less fear, and amazement,
Then if we had encountered with the lightning,
Hurled from Joves cloudy brow.
It was like my Caesar.
We fallen back, he made on, and as our fear
Had parted from us, with his dreadful looks,
Again we followed: but got near the sea:
On which his navy anchord; in one hand
Holding a scroll he had, above the waves,
And in the other grasping fast his sword
As it had bin a trident, forged by ??ulcan,
To calm the raging Ocean, he made away
As if he had bin Neptune: his friends like
So many Tritons followed their bold shouts,
Yielding a cheerful musique; we showered darts,
Upon them but in vain, they reached their ships,
And in their safety we are sunk; for Caesar
Prepares for war.
How fell the King?
Unable,
To follow Caesar, he was trod to death
By the pursuers, and with him the Priest,
Of Ices good Achoreus.
May the Earth,
Lye gently on their ashes.
I feel now,
That there are powers above us: and that it is not
Within the searching policies of man,
To alter their decrees.
I laugh at thee:
Where are thy threats now, (fool) thy scoffs, and scorns
Against the Gods? I see calamity
Is the best Mistress of Religion,
And can convert an Atheist.
O they come,
Mountains fall on me! O, for him to dye
That placed his heaven on earth, is an assurance
Of his descent to hell; where shall I hide me?
The greatest daring to a man dishonest,
Is but a bastard courage, ever fainting. 
Look on your Caesar; banish fear (my fairest) You now are safe.
By ??enus, not a kiss
Till our work be done: the Traitors once dispatched
To it, and we'll cry aim.
I will be speedy. 
Farewell again Arsinoe; how now Eros,
Ever faint-harted?
But that I am assured,
Your excellence can command the General,
I fear the Soldiers, for they look as if
They would be nibbling too.
He is all honour,
Nor do I now repent me of my favours;
Nor can I think nature ever made a woman,
That in her prime deserved him.
He's come back,
Pursue no farther; curb the Soldiers fury.
See (beauteous Mistress) their accursed heads,
That did conspire against us.
Furies plague 'em,
They had too fair an end, to dye like Soldiers,
Pompey fell by the sword; the cross, or halter
Should have dispatched them.
All is but death (good Sceva)
Be therefore satisfied, and now (my dearest)
Look up on Caesar, as he still appeared
A Conqueror, and this unfortunate King
Entombed with honour, we'll for Rome, where Caesar
Will show he can give Kingdom: for the Senate,
(Thy brother dead) shall willingly decree
The Crown of Egypt, (that was his) to thee.
NEw Titles, warrant not a Play for new,
The subject being old: and it is as true,
Fresh, and neat matter may with ease be framed
Out of their Stories, that have oft been named
With glory on the Stage: what borrows he
From him that wrote old Priams Tragedy.
That writes bis love to Hecuba? Sure, to tell
Of Caesars amorous heats, and how he fell
In the Capitol, can never be the same
To the Judicious: Nor will such blame
Those that penned this, for Barrenness when they find
Young Cleopatra here, and her great mind
Expressed to the height, with us a Maid, and free,
And how he rated her Virginity.
We treat not of what boldness she did dye,
Nor of her fatal Love to Anthony.
What wee present and offer to your view,
(??pone their Faiths) the Stage yet never knew.
Let Reason then, first to your wills give Laws,
And after judge of them, and of their Cause.
I Now should wish another had my place,
But that I hope to come off, and with grace.
And but express some sign that you are pleased,
We of our doubts, they of their fears are eased.
I would beg further (Gentlemen) and much say
In the favour of our selves, them, and the Play;
Did I not rest assured; the most I see
Hate Impudence, and cherish modesty.

