Dissuade me not.
It will breed a brawl.
I care not, I wear a Sword.
And wear discretion with it,
Or cast it off, let that direct your arm,
It is madness else, not valour, and more base
Then to receive a wrong.
Why would you have me
Sit down with a disgrace, and thank the doer?
We are not Stoics, and that passive courage
Is only now, commendable in Lackeys,
Peasants, and Tradesemen, not in men of rank,
And quality, as I am.
Doe not cherish
That daring vice, for which the whole age suffers
The blood of our bold youth, that heretofore
Was spent in honourable action,
Or to defend, or to enlarge the Kingdom,
For the honour of our Country, and our Prince,
Pores it self out, with prodigal expense
Upon our Mothers lap, the Earth that bred us
For every trifle, and these private Duels,
Which had their first original from the French;
(And for which, to this day, we are justly censured)
And banished from all civil Governments
Scarce three in Venice, in as many years;
In Florence, they are rarer, and in all
The fair Dominions of the Spanish King,
They are never heard of: Nay, those neighbour Countries,,
Which gladly imitate our other follies,
And come at a dear rate to buy them of us,
Begin now to detest them.
Will you? and yet—
And I have heard, that some of our late Kings,
For the lie, wearing of a Mistress, feathers;
A cheat at Cards or Dice and such like causes,
Have lost as many gallant Gentlemen,
As might have met the great Turk in the field
With confidence of a glorious Victory,
And shall we then—
No more, for shame no more,
Are you become a Patron to? it is a new one,
No more on it, burned, give it to some Orator,
To help him to enlarge his exercise,
With such a one, it might doe well, and profit
The Curate of the Parish, but for Cleremont
The bold, and under-taking Cleremont,
To talk thus to his friend his friend that knows him,
Dinant, that knows his Cleremont, is absurd,
And mere Apocripha.
Why, what know you of me?
Why if thou hast forgot thy self, I'll tell thee,
And not look back, to speak of what thou were
At fifteen, for at those years, I have heard
Thou wast fleshed, and entered bravely.
Well sir, well.
But yesterday, thou wast the common second,
Of all that only knew thee, thou had bills
Set up on every post, to give thee notice,
Where any difference was, and who were parties,
And as, to save the charges of the Law;
Poor men seek Arbitrators, thou were chosen
By such as knew thee not, to compound quarrels:
But thou were so delighted with the sport,
That if there were no just cause, thou would make one,
Or be engaged thy self: This godly calling
Thou hast followed five and twenty years, and studied
The Criticisms of contentions, and art thou
In so few hours transformed? certain this night
Thou hast had strange dreams, or rather visions.
Yes, Sir,
I have seen fools, and fighters, chained together,
And the Fighters had the upper hand and whipped first,
The poor Sotts laughing at 'em. What I have bin
It skils not, what I will be is resolved on.
Why then you'll fight no more?
Such is my purpose.
On no occasion?
There you stagger me,
Some kind of wrongs there are, which flesh and blood
Cannot endure.
Thou would not willingly,
Live a protested coward, or be called one?
Words, are but words.
Nor would thou take a blow?
Not from my friend, though drunk, and from an enemy,
I think much less.
There's some hope of thee left then.
Would thou hear me, behind my back disgraced?
Do you think I am a rogue? they that should do it
Had better bin borne dumb.
Or in thy presence?
See me o're-charg'd with odds?
I'd fall my self first.
Would thou endure thy Mistress be taken from thee,
And thou sit quiet?
There you touch my honour,
No French man can endure that.
Pl— upon thee,
Why dost thou talk of Peace then? that dare suffer
Nothing, or in thy self, or in thy friend
That is unmanly?
That I grant, I cannot:
But I'll not quarrel with this Gentleman,
For wearing stammel Breeches, or this Gamester,
For playing a thousand pounds, that owes me nothing;
For this mans taking up a common Wench
In rags, and lousy, then maintaining her
Caroached in cloth of Tissue, nor five hundred
Of such like toys, that at no part concern me;
Marry, where my honour, or my friend is questioned,
I have a Sword, and I think I may use it
To the cutting of a Rascals throat, or so,
Like a good Christian.
Thou art of a fine Religion,
And rather then we'll make a Schism in friendship,
I will be of it: But to be serious,
Thou art acquainted with my tedious love-suit
To fair Lamira.
Too well Sir, and remember
Your presents, courtship, that's too good a name,
Your slave-like services, your morning musique;
Your walking three hours in the rain at midnight,
To see her at her window, sometimes laughed at,
Sometimes admitted, and vouchsafed to kiss
Her glove, her skirt, nay I have heard, her slippers,
How then you triumphed?
Here was love forsooth.
These follies I deny not,
Such a contemptible thing, my dotage made me,
But my reward for this —
As you deserved.
For he that makes a goddess of a Puppet,
Merits no other recompense.
This day friend,
For thou art so —
I am no flatterer.
This proud, ungrateful she, is married to
Lame Champernell.
I know him, he has bin
As tall a Sea-man, and has thrived as well by it,
The loss of a leg and an Arm deducted, as any
That ever put from Marseils: you are tame,
Pl— on it, it mads me; if it were my case,
I should kill all the family.
Yet but now
You did preach patience.
I then came from confession,
And 't was enjoined me three hours for a penance,
To be a peaceable man, and to talk like one,
But now, all else being pardoned, I begin
On a new Tally, Foot doe any thing,
I'll second you.
I would not willingly
Make red, my yet white conscience, yet I purpose
In the open street, as they come from the Temple,
(For this way they must pass,) to speak my wrongs,
And doe it boldly. 
Were thy tongue a Cannon,
I would stand by thee, boy, they come, upon 'em.
Observe a little first.
This is fine fiddling.
COme away bring on the Bride
And place her by her Lovers side:
You fair troop of Maids attend her,
Pure and holy thoughts be friend her.
Blush, and wish, you Virgins all
Many such fair nights may fall
Hymen, fill the house with joy,
All thy sacred fires employ:
Bless the Bed, with holy love,
Now fair or be of Beauty move.
Stand by, for twill be heard.
This is strange rudeness.
It is courtship, balanced with injuries,
You all look pale with guilt, but I will die
Your cheeks with blushes, if in your seared veins,
There yet remain so much of honest blood
To make the colour; first to ye my Lord,
The Father of this Bride, whom you have sent
Alive into her grave.
How? to her grave?
Be patient sir, I'll speak of you anon,
You that allowed me liberal access,
To make my way with service, and approved of
My birth, my person, years, and no base fortune:
You that are rich, and but in this held wise too,
That as a Father should have looked upon
Your Daughter in a Husband, and aimed more
At what her youth, and heat of blood required
In lawful pleasures, then the parting from
Your Crowns to pay her dowre: you that already
Have one foot in the grave, yet study profit,
As if you were assured, to live here ever;
What poor end had you, in this choice? in what
Deserve I your contempt? my house, and honours,
At all parts equal yours, my fame as fair,
And not to praise my self, the City ranks me,
In the first file, of her most hopeful Gentry:
But Champernell is rich, and needs a nurse,
And not your gold: And add to that, he's old too,
His whole estate in likelihood, to descend
Upon a Family; Here was providence,
I grant, but in a Nobleman, base thrift:
No Merchants, nay, no Pirats, sell for Bondsman.
Their Countrymen, but you, a Gentleman,
To save a little gold have sold your Daughter
To worse then slavery.
This was spoke home indeed.
Sir, I shall take some other time to tell you,
That this harsh language, was delivered to
An old man, but my Father.
At your pleasure.
Proceed in your design, let me alone,
To answer him, or any man.
You presume
Too much upon your name, but may be cozened.
But for you, most unmindful of my service,
For now I may upbraid you, and with honour,
Since all is lost, and yet I am a gainer,
In being delivered from a torment in you,
For such you must have bin, you to whom nature
Gave with a liberal hand, most excellent form,
Your education, language, and discourse,
And judgement to distinguish when you shall
With feeling sorrow, understand how wretched
And miserable, you have made your self,
And but your self, have nothing to accuse,
Can you with hope from any beg compassion?
But you will say, you served your Fathers pleasure,
Forgetting that unjust commands of Parents
Are not to be obeyed, or that you are rich,
And that to wealth, all pleasure else are servants,
Yet but consider, how this wealth was purchased,
Twill trouble the possession.
You sir know
I got it, and with honour.
But from whom?
Remember that, and how: you'll come indeed
To houses bravely furnished, but demanding
Where it was bought, this soldier will not lie,
But answer truly, this rich cloth of Arras,
I made my prize in such a Ship, this Plate
Was my share in another; these fair Jewels,
Coming a shore, I got in such a Village,
The Maid, or Matron killed, from whom they were ravished,
The Wines you drink, are guilty too, for this,
This Candy Wine, three Merchants were undone,
These Suckets break as many more, in brief,
All you shall wear, or touch, or see, is purchased
By lawless force, and you but revel in
The tears, and groans, of such as were the owners.
It is false, most basely false.
Let losers talk.
Lastly, those joys, those best of joys, which Hymen
Freely bestows on such, that come to tie
The sacred knot he blesses, won unto it
By equal love, and mutual affection,
Not blindly led, with the desire of riches,
Most miserable you, shall never taste of,
This Marriage night, you'll meet a Widows bed,
Or failing of those pleasures, all Brides look for,
Sin in your wish it were so,
Thou art a Villain,
A base, malicious slauderer.
Strike him.
No, he is not worth a blow.
O that I had thee
In some close vault that only would yield room
To me to use my Sword, to thee no hope
To run away, I would make thee on thy knees,
Bite out the tongue that wronged me.
Pray you have patience.
This day I am to be your Sovereign,
Let me command you.
I am lost with rage,
And know not what I am my self, nor you:
Away, dare such as you, that love the smoke
Of peace, more then the fire of glorious War,
And like unprofitable drones, feed on
Your grandsires labours, that, as I am now,
Were gathering Bees, and filed their Hive, this Country
With brave triumphant spoils, censure our Actions?
You object my prizes to me, had you seen
The horror of a Sea-fight, with what danger
I made them mine; the fire I fearless fought in
And quenched it in mine enemies blood, which straight
Like Oil poured out on it, made it burn anew;
My Deck blown up, with noise enough to mock
The loudest thunder, and the desperate fools
That Boarded me, sent to defy the tempest
That were against me to the angry Sea,
Frighted with men thrown ore; no victory,
But in despite of the four Elements,
The Fire, the Ayre, the Sea, and sands hid in it
To be achieved, you would confess poor men,
(Though hopeless, such an honourable way
To get or wealth, or honour) in your selves;
He that through all these dreadful passages,
Pursued and overtook them, unafrighted,
Deserves reward, and not to have it stilt
By the base name of theft.
This is the Courtship,
That you must look for, Madam.
Twill doe well,
When nothing can be done, to spend the night with:
Your tongue is sound, good Lord, I could wish
For this young Ladies sake this leg, this arm,
And there is something else I will not name,
(Though it is the only thing that must content her)
Had the same vigour.
You shall buy these scoffs
With your best blood, help me once noble anger,
(Nay stir not, I alone must right my self)
And with one leg transport me to correct
These scandalous praters: ô that noble wounds
Should hinder just revenge? Do ye jeer me too?
I got these not as you doe your diseases
In Brothels, or with riotous abuse
Of wine in Taverns; I have one leg shot,
One arm disabled, and am honoured more,
By loosing them as I did in the face
Of a brave enemy then if they were
As when I put to Sea; you are French men only,
In that you have bin laid, and cured, go to:
You mock my leg but every bone about you,
Makes you good Almanack-makers, to foretell
What whether we shall have.
Put up your Sword.
Or turn it to a Crutch, there't may be useful,
And live, on the relation to your Wife,
Of what a brave man you were once.
And tell her
What a fine virtue, it is in a young Lady
To give an old man pap.
Or hire a Surgeon
To teach her to roll up your broken limbs.
To make a Pultesse, and endure the sent
Of oils and nasty Plasters.
Fie sir, fie,
You that have stood all dangers of all kinds,
To yield to a rivals scoff?
Shed tears upon
Your Wedding day? this is unmanly Gentlemen.
They are tears of anger o that I should live
To play the woman thus? All powerful heaven,
Restore me, but one hour, that strength again,
That I had once, to chastise in these men,
Their follies, and ill manners, and that done,
When you please, I'll yield up the fort of life,
And doe it gladly
We have the better of him,
We have made him cry.
You shall have satisfaction,
And I will doe it nobly, or disclaim me.
I say no more you have a Brother, Sister,
This is your Wedding day, we are in the street,
And howsoever, they forget their honour,
It is fit I loose not mine, by their example.
If there be Laws in Paris look to answer
This insolent affront
You that live by them,
Study 'em for heavens sake; for my part I know not
Nor care not what they are, Is their ought else
That you would say?
Nothing, I have my ends,
Lamira weeps, I have said too much I fear;
So dearly once I loved her, that I cannot
Endure to see her tears. 
See you perform it,
And doe it like my Nephew.
If I fail in it
Ne'er know me more, Cousin Beupro
Repent not
What thou hast done, my life, thou shalt not find
I am decrepit; in my love, and service,
I will be young, and constant, and believe me,
For thou shall find it true, in scorn of all
The scandals these rude men have thrown upon me
I'll meet thy pleasures, with a young mans ardour
And in all circumstances, of a Husband,
Perform my parts.
Good Sir, I am your servant,
And it is too late now, if I did repent,
(Which as I am a virgin yet, I doe not)
To undo the knot, that by the Church is tied
Only I would beseech ye, as you have,
A good opinion of me, and my virtues,
For so you have pleased to stile my innocent weakness,
That what hath passed between Dinant and me,
Or what now in your hearing he hath spoken,
Beget not doubts, or fears.
I apprehend you,
You think I will be jealous, as I live
Thou art mistaken sweet; and to confirm it
Discourse with whom thou wilt, ride where thou wilt,
Feast whom thou wilt, as often as thou wilt,
For I will have no other guards upon thee
Then thine own thoughts,
I'll use this liberty
With moderation Sir,
I am resolved
Steal off, i'll follow you,
Come Sir, you droop,
Till you find cause, which I shall never give
Dislike not of your son in Law,
Sir, You teach me
The language I should use; I am most happy
In being so near you. 
O my fears good nurse
Follow my Brother unobserved and learn,
Which way he takes.
I will be careful Madam. 
Between us complements are superfluous,
One Gentlemen, the affront we have met here
We'll think upon hereafter, it were unfit
To cherish any thought to breed unrest,
Or to our selves, or to our Nuptial feast.
We shall have sport, ner fear't
What sport I prithee?
Why we must fight, I know it, and I long for it
It was apparent in the fiery eye,
Of young Verdoone, Beaupre looked pale and shook too,
Familiar signs of anger. They are both brave fellows
Tried and approved, and I am proved to encounter.
With men, from whom no honour can be lost
They will play up to a man, and set him off,
When ere I go to the field, heaven keep me from
The meeting of an unflesh'd youth or Coward,
The first to get a name, comes on too hot,
The Coward is so swift in giving ground,
There is no overtaking him, without
A hunting Nag, well breathed too.
All this while,
You ne'er think on the danger,
Why it is no more,
Then meeting of a dozen Friends at Supper,
And drinking hard; mischief comes there unlooked for,
I am sure as sudden, and strikes home as often,
For this we are prepared
Lamira Loves
Her Brother Beaupre dearly.
What of that?
And should he call me to account for what
But now I speak, nor can I with mine honour
Recant my words, that little hope is left me,
Here to enjoy what (next to heaven I long for,)
Is taken from me,
Why what can you hope for,
She being now married?
On my Cleremont,
To you all secrets of my heart lye open,
And I rest most secure that whatsoer'e
I look up there, is as a private thought,
And will no farther wrong me, I am a Frenchman,
And for the greater part, we are borne Courtiers,
She is a woman, and how ever yet,
No heat of service, had the power to melt
Her frozen Chastity, time and opportunity
May work her to my ends, I confess ill ones,
And yet I must pursue 'em: now her marriage,
In probability, will no way hurt,
But rather help me,
Sits the wind there? pray you tell me
How far off, dwells your love from lust?
Too near,
But prithee chide me not,
Not I, go on boy,
I have faults my self, and will not reprehend
A crime I am not free from: for her Marriage,
I doe esteem it (and most bachelors are
Of my opinion) as a fair protection,
To play the wanton, without loss of honour.
Would she make rise of't so, I were most happy.
No more of this, Judge now,
Whither I have the gift of prophecy.
Monsieur Dinant.
I am glad to find you, Sir.
I am at your service.
Good Monsieur Cleremont, I have long wished
To be known better to you,
My desires
Embrace your wishes Sir,
Sir, I have ever
Esteemed you truly noble, and profess.
I should have bin most proud, to have had the honour,
To call you Brother, but my Fathers pleasure
Denied that happiness, I know no man lives,
That can command his passions, and therefore
Dare not condemn, the late intemperate language
You were pleased to use, to my Father and my Sister
Hoe's old and she a woman, I most sortie,
My honour does compel me to entreat you,
To doe me the favour, with your sword to meet me
A mile without the City.
You much honour me.
In the demand, I'll gladly waite upon you,
O Sir you teach me what to say: the time?
With the next Sun, if you think fit.
The place.
Ne'er to the vineyard eastward from the City,
I like it well, this gentleman if you please
Will keep me company,
That is agreed on;
And in my friends behalf I will attend him
You shall not miss my service.
Good day Gentlemen. 
At your Commandment.
Proved to be your servants,
I think there is no Nation under heaven
That cut their enemies throats with complement,
And such fine tricks as we doe: If you have
Any few Prayers to say, this night you may
Ca l'em to mind and use 'em, for my self,
As I have little to loose, my care is less,
So till to morrow morning, I bequeath you,
To your devotions; and those payed, but use
That noble courage I have seen, and we
Shall fight, as in a Castle,
Thou art all honour,
Thy resoultion, would steel a Coward,
And I most fortunate, in such a Friend,
All tenderness, and nice respect of woman,
Be now far from me, reputation take
A full possession of my heart, and prove
Honour the first place holds, the second love. 
Sleeps my Lord still Carlote.
Not to be waked
By your Ladyships cheerful looks, I well perceive
That this night, the good Lord hath bin
At an unusual service, and no wonder
If he rest after it
You are very bold
Your Creature Madam and when you are pleased
Sadness to me's a stranger, your good pardon
If I speak like a fool, I could have wished,
To have taine your place to night, had bold Dinant
Your first and most obsequious servant tasted
Those delicates, which by his lethargy
As it appears, have cloyed my Lord,
No more.
I am silenced Madam
Saw you my nurse this morning?
No Madam.
I am full of fears. 
Who's that?
She you enquired for
Bring her in, and leave me. 
Now nurse what news.
O Lady dreadful ones,
They are to fight this morning, ther's no remedy
I saw my Lord your Brother, and Verdoone.
Take horse as I came by,
Wher's Cleremont?
I met him too, and mounted.
Wher's Dinant?
There's all the hope, I have stayed him with a trick,
If I have done well so,
What trick?
I 'tould him,
Your Ladyship laid your command upon him,
To attend you presently, and to confirm it,
Gave him the ring' he oft hath seen you wear,
That you bestowed on me; he waits without
Disguised, and if you have that power in him,
As I presume you have, it is in you
To stay or alter him.
Have you learnt the place,
Where they are to encounter?
Yes it is where
The Duke of Burgundy, met Lewis the eleventh
Enough I will reward thee liberally, 
Go bring him in, full dear I loved Dinant,
While it was lawful, but those fires are quenched,
I being now another, truth forgive me
And let dissimulation, be no crime,
Though most unwillingly, I put it on
To guard a Brothers safety.
Now your pleasure,
Though ill you have deserved it, you persev'd
I am still your fool, and cannot but obey
What ever you command
You speak as if
You did repent it and it is not worth my thanks then,
But there has bin a time, in which you would
Receive this as a favour
Hope was left then
Of recompense.
Why I am still Lamira.
And you Dinant and it is yet in my power
I dare not say, i'll put it into act,
To reward your love and service,
Ther's some comfort,
But think not that so low I przie my fame,
To give it up to any man that refuses
To buy it, or with danger or performance
Of what I shall enjoin him,
Name that danger
Be it of what horrid shape soever Lady
Which I will shrink at; only at this instant
Be speedy in it
I'll put you to the trial:
You shall not fight to day, doe you start at that?
Not with my Brother, I have heard •our difference,
Mine is no Helens beauty, to be purchased
With blood, and so defended if you look for
Favours from me, deserve them with obedience,
Ther's no way else to gain 'em
You command
What with mine honour I cannot obey
Which lies at pawn against it and a friend
Equally dear as that, or life engaged,
Not for himself, but me.
Why, foolish man,
Dare you solicit me, to serve your lust,
In which not only, I abuse my Lord,
My father, and my family, but write whore,
Though not upon my forehead, in my conscience,
To be read hourly, and yet name your honours?
Yours suffer but in circumstance; mine in substance,
If you obey me, you part with some credit,
From whom? the giddy multitude; but mankind
Will censure me, and justly
I will loose,
What most I doe desire, rather then hazard
So dear a friend, or write my self a coward,
It is better be no man
This will not doe;
Why I desire not, you should be a coward,
Nor doe I weigh my Brothers life with yours,
Meet him, fight with him, doe, and kill him fairly,
Let me not suffer f r you, I am careless.
Suffer for me?
For you, my kindness to you,
Already brands me, with a strumpets name,
O that I knew the wretch!
I will not name him,
Nor give you any Character to know him;
But if you dare, and instantly ride forth
At the west port of the City, and defend there
My reputation, against all you meet,
For two hours on lie, i'll not swear Dinant,
To satisfy, (though sure I think I shall)
What ever you desire, if you deny this
Be desperate, for willingly, by this light,
I'll never see thee more
Two hours, doe you say?
Only two hours,
I were no Gentleman,
Should I make scruple of it; this favour arms me,
And boldly il' perform it. 
I am glad on it.
This will prevent their meeting yet, and keep
My Brother safe, which was the mark I shot at. 
I am first in the field that honours gained of our side
Pray Heaven I may get of as honourably,
The hour is past, I wonder Dinant comes not,
This is the place, I cannot see him yet;
It is his quarrel too, that brought me hither,
And I ne'er knew him yet, but to this honour,
A firm and worthy Friend, yet I see nothing,
Nor Horse nor man; it would vex me, to be left here,
To th mercy of two swords, and two approved ones
I never knew him last.
You are well met Cleremont.
You are a fair Gentleman, &amp; love your friend Sir
What are you ready the time has over tan us?
And this you know the place.
No Dinant yet?
We come not now to argue, but to doe;
We waite you Sir,
Ther's no time past yet. Gentlemen,
We have day enough: i'st possible he comes not?
You see I am ready here, and doe but stay,
Till my Friend come, walk but a turn or two,
Twill not be long.
We came to fight.
Ye shall fight Gentlemen,
And fight enough, but a short turn or two
I think I see him, set up your watch, we'll fight by it.
That is not hee; we will not be deluded.
Am I bobbed thus, pray take a pipe of tobacco?
Or sing but some new ayre; by that time, Gentlemen—
Come draw your sword, you know the custom here Sir
First come, first served
Though it be held a custom,
And practised so, I doe not hold it honest;
What honour can you both win on me single?
Yield up you sword then.
Yield my Sword? that's Hebrew;
I'll be first cut a pieces; hold but a while,
I'll take the next that comes,
You are an old Gentleman.
Yes indeed am I, Sir,
And wear no Sword?
I need none; Sir,
I would you did, and had one;
I want now such a foolish curtsy
You see these Gentlemen;
You want a second.
In good Faith Sir, I was never handsome at it,
I would you had my Son, but hoe's in Italy,
A proper Gentleman; you may doe well gallants
If you quarrel be not capital, to have more mercy,
The Gentleman may doe his Country —
Now I beseech you, Sir,
If you dare not fight, doe not stay to beg my pardon,
There lies your way.
Good morrow Gentlemen. 
You see your fortune,
You had better yield your sword.
Pray ye stay a little
Upon mine honesty, you shall be fought with;
Well, Dinant, well, these wear swords and seem brave fellows
As you are Gentlemen, one of you supply me
I want a second now to meet these gallants,
You know what honour is,
Sir you must pardon us,
We go about the same work, you are ready for;
And must fight presently, else we were your servants,
God speed you and good day. 
Am I thus Colted?
Come either yield —
As you are honest Gentlemen,
Stay but the next, and then i'll take my fortune,
And if I fight not like a man — Fie Dinant,
Cold now and treacherous,
I understand your causes.
Yours about corn, yours about pins and glasses,
Will you make me mad, have I not all the parcels?
And his Petition too, about Bell-founding?
Send in your witnesses, what will you have me doe?
Will you have me break my heart? my brains are melted;
And tell your Master, as I am a gentleman,
His Cause shall be the first, commend me to your Mistress,
And tell her, if there be an extraordinary feather,
And tall enough for her: I shall dispatch you too,
I know your Cause, for transporting of Farthingales
Trouble me no more, I say, again to you,
No more vexation: bid my wife send me some puddings;
I have a Cause to run through, requires puddings,
Puddings enough. Farewell.
God speed you, sir.
Would he would take this fellow.
A rare Youth.
If you be not hasty, sir.
Yes, I am hasty,
Exceeding hasty, sir, I am going to the Parliament,
You understand this bag, if you have any business
Depending there, be short, and let me hear it,
And pay your Fees.
Faith, sir, I have a business,
But it depends upon no Parliament.
I have no skill in it then.
I must desire you,
It is a Sword matter, sir.
I am no Cutler,
I am an Advocate, sir.
How the thing looks?
When he brings him to fight.
Be not so hasty,
You wear a good Sword.
I know not that,
I never drew it yet, or whether it be a Sword—
I must entreat you try, sir, and bear a part
Against these Gentlemen, I want a second;
Ye seem a man, and it is a noble office.
I am a Lawyer, sir, I am no fighter.
You that breed quarrels, sir, know best to satisfy.
This is some sport yet.
If this fellow should fight.
And for any thing I know, I am an arrant coward,
Doe not trust me, I think I am a coward.
Try, try, you are mistaken: walk on gentlemen,
The man shall follow presently.
Are ye mad gentleman?
My business is within this half hour,
That's all one,
We'll dispatch within this quarter, there in that bottom,
It is most convenient gentlemen.
Well, we'll wait, sir.
Why this will be a comic fight, you'll follow.
As I am a true man, I cannot fight. 
Away, away,
I know you can: I like your modesty,
I know you will fight, and so fight, with such mettle,
And with such judgement, meet your enemies sury;
I see it in your eye, sir.
I'll be hanged then;
And I charge you, in the Kings name, name no more fighting.
I charge you in the Kings name play the man,
Which if you doe not quickly, I begin with you,
Isle make you dance, doe you see your fiddle stick?
Sweet Advocate thou shalt fight.
Stand farther gentleman.
Or I'll give you such a dust of the chapps—
Spoke bravely,
And like thy self, a noble Advocate:
Come to thy tools.
I doe not say I'll fight.
I say thou shalt, and bravely.
If I doe fight;
I say, if I doe, but doe not depend upon it,
And yet I have a foolish itch upon me,
What shall become of my Writings?
Let 'em lie by,
They will not run away, man.
I may be killed too,
And where are all my causes then? my business?
I will not fight, I cannot fight, my Causes—
Thou shalt fight, if thou had a thousand causes,
Thou art a man to fight for any cause,
And carry it with honour.
Hum I say you so? if I should
Be such a coxcomb to prove valiant now—
I know thou art most valiant.
Doe you think so?
I am undone for ever, if it prove so,
I tell you that, my honest friend, for ever;
For I shall ne'er leave quarrelling.
How long must we fight? for I cannot stay,
Nor will not stay, I have business.
We'll do it in a minute in a moment.
Here will I hang my bag then, it may save my belly,
I never loved cold iron there.
You doe wisely.
Help me to pluck my sword out then, quickly, quickly,
'T has not seen Sun these ten years.
How it grumbles?
This Sword is vengeance angry.
Now I'll put my hat up,
And say my prayers as I go; away boy,
If I be killed, remember the little Lawyer. 
They are both come on, that may be a stubborn rascal,
Take you that ground, 
Isle stay here, fight bravely.
To it cheerfully my boys, you'll let's have fair play,
None of your foyning tricks.
Come forward Monsieur; 
What hast thou there? a pudding in thy belly?
I shall see what it holds.
Put your spoon home then:
Nay, since I must fight, have at you without wit, sir:
God a mercy bag.
Nothing but bombast in ye?
The rogue winks and fights.
Now your sine fencing, sir: 
Stand off, thou die on point else,
I have it, I have it: yet further off:
I have his Sword.
Then keep it, be sure you keep it.
I'll put it in my mouth else.
Stand further off yet, and stand quietly,
And look another way, or I'll be with you.
Is this all? I'll undertake within these two days
To furnish any Cutler in this Kingdom.
Pox, what a fortune's this? disarmed by a puppy?
A snail? a dog?
No more o'these words Gentleman,
Sweet gentleman no more, doe not provoke me,
Go walk in the horse fair; whistle gentleman,
What must I doe now?
Help me, I am almost breathless.
With all my heart there's a cold pie for you, sir.
Thou strik'st me, fool.
Thou fool, stand further off then,
Deliver, deliver.
Hold fast. 
I never fail in it
There's twelve pence, go buy you two leaden Daggers,
Have I done well?
Most like a gentleman.
And we two basely lost.
It is but a fortune,
We shall yet find an hour. 
I shall be glad on it.
Whore's my cloak, and my trinkets?
Or will you sight any longer, for a crash or two?
I am your noble friend, sir.
It may be so.
What honour shall I doe you,
For this great curtsy?
All I desire of ye,
Is to take the quarrel to your self, and let me hear no more on it
I have no liking to it, it is a foolish matter,
And help me to put up my Sword.
Most willingly.
But I am bound to gratify you, and I must not leave you.
I tell you, I will not be gratified,
Nor I will hear no more on it: take the Swords too,
And doe not anger me but leave me quietly.
For the matter of honour, it is at your own disposure,
And so, and so,
This is a most rare Lawyer:
I am sure most valiant. Well Dinant as you satisfy me,
I say no more: I am laden like an Armourer. 
To be dispatcht upon a sleeveless errand?
To leave my friend engaged, mine honour tainted?
These are trim things. I am set here like a Perdue,
To watch a fellow, that has wronged my Mistress,
A scurvy fellow, that must pass this way,
But what this scurvy fellow is, or whence,
Or whether his name be William or John,
Or Anthony or Dick or any thing, I know not;
A scurvy rascally fellow. I must aim at,
And there's the office of an Ass flung on me.
Sure Cleremont has fought, but how come off,
And what the world shall think of me hereafter:
Well, woman, woman. I must look your rascals,
And loose my reputation: ye have a fine power over us.
These two long hours I have trotted here, and curiously
Surveyed all goers by, yet find no rascal,
Nor any face to quarrel with: 
What's that?
This is a rascally voice sure it comes this way.
He struck so hard the Basin broke,
And Tarquin heard the sound.
What master thing is this? let me survey it.
And then he struck his neck in two.
This may be a rascal, but it is a mad rascal,
What an Alphabet of faces he puts on?
Hey how it fences? if this should be the rogue,
As it is the likeliest rogue. I see this day—
Was ever man for Ladies sake? down, down.
And what are you good sir? down, down, down, down.
What's that to you, good sir? down, down.
A pox on you good, sir, down, down, down,
You with your Buckram bag, what make you here?
And from whence come you? I could fight with my shadow now.
Thou fierce man, that like sir Lancelot dost appear,
I need not tell thee what I am, nor eke what I make here.
This is a precious knave, stay, stay, good Tristram,
And let me ask thy mightiness a question,
Did ye never abuse a Lady?
Not; to abuse a Lady, is very hard, sir,
Say you so, sir?
Did thou never abuse her honour?
Not; to abuse her honour, is impossible.
Certain this is the rascal: What's thy name?
My name is Cock a two, use me respectively,
I will be Cock of three else.
What's all this?
You say, you did abuse a Lady;
You lie.
And that you wronged her honour.
That's two lies,
Speak suddenly, for I am full of business.
What art thou, or what can thou be, thou peagoose,
That dare give me the lie thus? thou make me wonder.
And wonder on, till time makes all this plain.
You must not part so, sir, art thou a gentleman?
Ask those, upon whose ruins, I am mounted.
This is some Cavellero Knight o'th'Sun.
I tell thee, I am as good a gentleman as the Duke;
I have achieved — go follow thy business.
But for this Lady, sir—
Why, hang this Lady, sir,
And the Lady Mother too, sir, what have I to do with Ladies?
It is the little Lawyers voice: has he got my way?
It should be here abouts.
Ye dry biscuit rogue,
I will so swinge you for this blasphemy—
Have I found you out?
That should be Dinants tongue too.
And I defy thee, do thy worst: ô ho quoth Lancelot tho.
And that thou shalt know, I am a true gentleman,
And speak according to the phrase triumphant;
Thy Lady, is a scurvy Lady, and a shitten Lady,
And though I never heard of her, a debauched Lady,
And thou, a squire of low degree; will that content thee?
Dost thou way-lay me with Ladies? A pretty sword, sir,
A very pretty sword, I have a great mind to it.
You shall not loose your longing, rogue.
Hold, hold,
Hold Dinant, as thou art a gentleman.
As much as you will, my hand is in now.
I am your friend, sir: Dinant you draw your sword
Upon the gentleman, preserved your honour:
This was my second and did back me nobly,
For shame forbear.
I ask your mercy, sir, and am your servant now.
May we not fight then?
I am sure you shall not now.
I am sorry for it I am sure I'll stay no longer then.
Not a jot longer: are there any more on ye before?
I will sing still, sir. 
I look now you should chide me, and It is sir,
And with much bitterness, express your anger,
I have deserve,d: yet when you know—.
I thank ye,
Doe you think, that the wrong you have offred me,
The most unmanly wrong, unfriendly wrong—
I doe confess —
That boyish slight—
Not so, sir.
That poor, and base renouncing of your honour,
Can be allayed with words?
I give you way still.
Coloured with smooth excuses? Was it a friends part,
A Gentleman's, a mans that wears a Sword,
And stands upon the point of reputation,
To hide his head, then, when his honour called him?
Called him aloud, and lead him to his fortune?
To halt and slip the collar? by my life,
I would have given my life, I had never known thee,
Thou hast eaten Canker-like into my judgement
With this disgrace, my whole life, cannot heal agiine.
This I can suffer too, I find it honest.
Can you pretend an excuse now may absolve you,
Or any thing like honest, to bring you off?
Engage me like an Ass?
Will you but hear me?
Expose me like a Jade, to tug, and hale through,
Laughed at, and almost hooted? your disgraces,
Invite men's Swords, and angers to dispatch me.
If you will be patient.
And be abused still: But that I have called thee friend,
And to that name, allow a Sanctuary,
You should hear further from me, I would not talk thus:
But henceforth stand upon your own bottom, sir,
And bear your own abuses, I scorn my sword
Should travel in so poor and empty quarrels.
Ha, you done yet? take your whole swinge of anger,
I'll bear all with content.
Why were you absent?
You know I am no Coward, you have seen that,
And therefore, out of fear, forsook you not:
You know I am not false, of a treacherous nature,
Apt to betray my friend I have fought for you too;
You know no business, that concerned my state,
My kindred, or my life.
Where was the fault then?
The honour of that Lady I adore
Her credit, and her name: ye know she sent for me,
And with what hast.
What was he that traduced?
The man in the Moon, I think, hither I was sent,
But to what end—
This is a pretty flimflam.
I am glad I have met you sir, I have bin seeking,
And seeking every where.
And now you have found him,
Declare that business, our Ambassador.
What's that to ye good man flouter? O sir, my Lady.
Prithee no more of thy Lady, I have too much on it.
Let me have a little, speak to me.
To you sir?
It is more then time: All occasions set aside sir,
Or whatsoever may be thought a business—
What then?
Repair to me within this hour.
Where?
What's that to you? come you, sir, when you're sent for.
God a mercy Mumpsimus,
You may go Dinant, and follow this old Fairy,
Till you have lost your self, your friends, your credit,
And honey out your youth, in rare adventures,
I can but grieve, I have known you.
Will ye go sir?
I come not often to you with these blessings,
You may believe that thing there, and repent it,
That dogged thing,
Peace touchwood.
I will not go:
Go bid your Lady seek some fool, to fawn on her
Some unexperienced puppy, to make sport with,
I have bin her mirth too long, thus I shake from me
The fetters she put on; thus her enchantments
I blow away like wind, no more her beauty.
Take heed sir, what you say.
Go forward, Dinant.
The charms shot from her eyes —
Be wise.
Be Valiant.
That tongue that tells fair tales to men's destructions
Shall never rack me more.
Stay there.
Go forward.
I will now hear her, see her as a woman,
Survey her and the power man has allowed, sir,
As I would doe the course of common things,
Unmoved, unstruck.
Hold there, and I forgive thee.
She is not fair, and that that makes her proud,
Is not her own, our eyes bestow it on her,
To touch and kiss he•, is no blessedness,
A Sun-burnt Ethiopes lip's as soft as hers.
Go bid her stick some other triumph up,
And take into her favour some dull fool,
That has no precious time to loose, no friends,
No honour, nor no life, like a bold Merchant,
A bold and banquerupt man, I have ventured all these,
And split my bottom: return this answer to her,
I am awake again, and see her mischiefs,
And am not now, on every idle errand,
And now coined anger, to be hurried,
And then despised again, I have forgot her.
If this be true—
I am sorry, I have troubled you,
More sorry, that my Lady has adventured
So great a favour, in so weak a mind:
This hour you have refused, that when you come to know it,
Will run you mad, and make you curse that fellow,
She is not fair, nor handsome, so I leave you.
Stay Lady, stay, but is there such a business?
You would break your neck it were yours.
My back, you would say.
But play the friends part still, sir, and undo him,
It is a fair office.
I have spoke too liberally.
I shall deliver what you say.
You shall be hanged first,
You would fine be prating now; take the man with you.
Not I, I have no power.
You may go Dinant.
It is in's own will, I had no further charge, sir,
Then to tell him what I did, which if I had thought
It should have bin received so—
Faith you may,
You doe not know, how far it may concern you.
If I perceived any trick in it.
Twill end there.
It is my fault then, there is an hour in fortune,
That must be still observed: you think I'll chide you,
When things must be, nay see, an he will hold his head up?
Would such a Lady send with such a charge too?
Say she has plaid the fool, play the fool with her again,
The great fool, the greater still the better,
He shall go with you woman.
As it please him,
I know the way alone else.
Where is your Lady?
I shall direct you quickly.
Well, I'll go,
But what her wrongs, will give me leave to say.
We'll leave that to your selves: I shall hear from you.
As soon as I come off—
Come on then bravely;
Farewell till then, and play the man.
You are merry;
All I expect is scorn: Isle lead you Lady.
We'll venture on him.
Out of my doors I charge thee, see me no more.
Your Nephew?
I disclaim him.
He has no part in me, nor in my blood,
My Brother that kept fortune bound, and left
Conquest hereditary to his Issue
Could not beget a coward.
I fought, sir,
Like a good fellow, and a soldier too,
But men are men, and cannot make their fates:
Ascribe you to my Father, what you please,
I am borne to suffer.
All disgrace: wretch.
Good sir be patient.
Was there no tree,
(For to fall by a noble enemies sword,
A Coward is unworthy) nor no River,
To force thy life out backward, or to drown it,
But that thou must survive thy infamy?
And kill me, with the sight of one I hate?
And gladly would forget?
Sir, his misfortune
Deserves not this reproof.
In your opinion,
It is fit you two should be of one belief,
You are indeed, fine gallants, and fight bravely
In the City with your tongues, but in the field
Have neither spirit to dare, nor power to doe,
Your swords, are all led there.
I know no duty,
(How ever you may wreak your spleen on him)
That binds me to endure this.
From Dinant
You'll suffer more; that ever cursed I,
Should give my honour up, to the defence
Of such a thing as he is, or my Lady
That is all Innocent, for whom a dove would
Assume the courage of a daring Eagle,
Repose her confidence in one that can
No better guard her. In contempt of you
I love Dinant, mine enemy, nay admire him,
His valour claims it from me, and with justice,
He that could fight thus, in a cause not honest,
His sword edged with defence, of right and honour,
Would pierce as deep as lightning, with that speed too,
And kill as deadly.
You are as far from Justice,
In him you praise, as equity in the censure,
You load me with.
Dinant? he durst not meet us.
How? durst not brother?
Durst not, I repeat it;
Nor was it Cleremont's valour that disarmed us,
I had the better of him; for Dinant,
If that might make my peace with you, I dare
Write him a Coward, upon every post,
And with the hazard of my life defend it.
If it were laid at the stake, you'd loose it, Nephew.
Came he not, say you?
No, but in his room,
There was a devil, hired from some Magician
In the shape of an Attorney.
It was he did it.
And his the honour.
I could wish Dinant—
But what talk I of one that stepped aside,
And durst not come?
I am such a friend to truth,
I cannot hear this: why doe you detract
Thus poorly (I should say to others basely)
From one, of such approved worth?
Ha! how's this?
From one so excellent, in all that's noble,
Whose only weakness, is excess of courage?
That knows no enemies, that he cannot master,
But his affections, and in them, the worst
His love to me.
To you?
Yes, sir to me,
I dare (for what is that, which Innocence dares not)
To you profess it, and he shunned the Combat
For fear, or doubt of these: blush and repent,
That you in thought, ere did that wrong to valour.
Why, this is rare.
Before heaven, exceeding rare;
Why modest Lady, you that sing such Encomiums
Of your first Suitor—
How can ye convince us
In our reports?
With what you cannot answer,
It was my command that stayed him.
Your command?
Mine, sir, and had my will ranked with my power,
And his obedience, I could have sent him
With more ease, weaponless to you, and bound,
Then have kept him back, so well he loves his honour
Beyond his life.
Better, and better still,
I wrought with him in private to divert him
From your assured destruction, had he met you.
In private?
Yes, and used all Arts, all Charms,
Of one that knew her self the absolute Mistress
Of all his faculties.
Gave all rewards too
His service could deserve; did not he take
The measure of my sheets?
Doe not look yellow,
I have cause to speak; frowns cannot fright me,
By all my hopes, as I am spotless to you,
If I rest once assured, you doe but doubt me,
Or curb me of that freedom, you once gave me—
What then?
I'll not alone, abuse your bed, that's nothing,
But to your more vexation, it is resolved on,
I'll run away, and then try if Dinant
Have courage to defend me.
Impudent!
And on the sudden—
How are ye transformed,
From what you were?
I was an innocent Virgin,
And I can truly swear, a Wife as pure
As ever lay by Husband, and will die so,
Let me live unsuspected, I am no servant,
Nor will be used like one: If you desire
To keep me constant, as I would be, let
Trust and belief in you, beget, and nurse it;
Unnecessary jealousies, make more whores
Then all baits else, laid to entrap our frailties.
There's no contesting with her, from a child
Once moved, she hardly was to be appeased,
Yet I dare swear her honest.
So I think too,
On better judgement: I am no Italian
To lock her up; nor would I be a Dutchman,
To have my Wife, my sovereign, to command me:
I'll try the gentler way, but if that fail,
Believe it, Sir, there's nothing but extremes,
Which she must feel from me.
That, as you please, sir.
You have won the breeches, Madam, look up sweetly,
My Lord limps toward you.
You will learn more manners.
This is a fee, for counsel that's unasked for.
Come, I mistook thee sweet, prithee forgive me,
I never will be jealous: ere I cherish
Such a mechanic humour; I'll be nothing;
I'll say Dinant, is all that thou would have him,
Will that suffice?
It is well, sir.
Use thy freedom
Unchecked, and unobserved, if thou wilt have it,
These shall forget their honour, I my wrongs
We'll all dote on him, hell be my reward
If I dissemble.
And that hell take me
If I affect him, he's a lustful villain,
(But yet no coward) and solicits me
To my dishonour, that's indeed a quarrel,
And truly mine, which I will so revenge,
As it shall fright, such as dare only think
To be adulterers.
Use thine own ways,
I give up all to thee.
O women, women!
When you are pleased you are the least of evils.
I'll rime to it, but provoked, the worst of devils.
I know Monsier La-writ.
Would he knew himself, Sir.
He was a pretty Lawyer, a kind of pretty Lawyer.
Of a kind, of unable thing.
A fine Lawyer, Sir,
And would have firk'd you up a business,
And out of this Court into that.
Ye are too forward,
Not so fine my friends, something he could have done,
But short, short.
I know your worships favour,
You are Nephew to the Judge, Sir.
It may be so,
And something may be done, without trotting in the dirt, friends;
It may be I can take him in his Chamber,
And have an hours talk, it may be so,
And tell him that in's ear, there are such courtesies:
I will not say, I can.
We know you can, sir.
Peradventure I, peradventure no: but whore's Lawrit?
VVhere's your sufficient Lawyer?
He's blown up, Sir.
Run mad, and quarrels, with the dog he meets;
He is no Lawyer, of this world now.
Your reason?
Is he defunct? is he dead?
No, he's not dead yet, sir;
But I would be loath to take a lease on's life for two hours:
Alas, he is possessed sir, with the spirit of fighting,
And quarrels with all people; but how he came to it—
If he fight well, and like a Gentleman,
The man may fight, for it is a lawful calling.
Look you my friends, I am a civil Gentleman,
And my Lord my Uncle loves me.
We all know it, sir.
I think he does, sir, I have business too, much business,
Turn you some forty or fifty Causes in a week;
Yet when I get an hour of vacancy,
I can fight too my friends, a little does well,
I would be loath to learn to fight.
But and't please you, sir,
His fighting has neglected all our business,
We are undone, our causes cast away, sir,
His not appearance.
There he fought too long
A little, &amp; fight well, he fought too long indeed friends;
But ne'er the less, things must be, as they may,
And there be ways—
We know, sir, if you please—
Something I'll doe; go rally up your Causes.
Now you may behold sir,
And be a witness, whether we lie or no.
I'll meet you at the Ordinary, sweet Gentlemen,
And if there be a wench or two—
We'll have 'em.
No handling any Duels before I come,
We'll have no going less, I hate a coward.
There shall be nothing done.
Make all the quarrels
You can devise before I come, and let's all fight,
There is no sport else.
We'll see what may be done, sir,
Ha? Monsier La-writ?
Baffled in way of business,
My causes cast away, Judgement against us?
Why there it goes
What shall we do the whilst Sir?
Breed new dissentions, go hang your selves
It is aloe no to me; I have a new trade of living.
Doe you hear what he says Sir?
The Gentleman, speaks finely
Will any of you fight? Fightings my occupation
If you find your selves aggrieved;
A complete Gentleman.
Avaunt thou buckr•m budget of petitions,
Thou spittle of lame causes; I lament for thee,
And till revenge be taken —
It is most excellent.
There every man choose his paper, and his place.
I'll answer ye all, I will neglect no mans business
But he shall have satisfaction like a Gentleman,
The Judge may doe and not doe, hoe's but a Monsieur
You have nothing of mine in your bag, Sir,
I know not Sir,
But you may put any thing in, any fighting thing
It is sufficient, you may hear hereafter.
I rest your servant Sir,
No more words Gentlemen
But follow me, no more words as you love me,
The Gentleman's, a noble Gentleman.
I shall doe what I can, and then —
We thank you Sir, 
Not a word to disturb him, hoe's a Gentleman.
No cause go? o my side the judge cast all?
And because I was honourably employed in action,
And not appeared, pronounce? it is very well,
It is well faith, it is well, Judge.
Who have we here?
My little furious Lawyer?
I say it is well,
But mark the end.
How he is metamorphis'd?
Nothing of Lawyer left not a bit of buckrum,
No soliciting face now,
This is no simple conversion
Your servant Sir, and Friend.
You come in time, Sir,
The happier man, to be at your command then.
You may wonder to see me thus; but tha'ts all one
Time shall declare; it is true I was a Lawyer,
But I have mend that coat, I hate a Lawyer,
I talked much in the Court, now I hate talking
I did you the office of a man.
I must confess it,
And budged not, no I budged not
No, ye did not,
Ther's it then, one good turn requires another
Most willing Sir, I am ready at your service
There read, and understand, &amp; then deliver it
This is a challenge Sir,
It is very like Sir,
I seldom now write Sonnets
O admirantis,
To Monsieur Vertaigne the president,
I choose no fool sir,
Why hoe's no sword man Sir,
Let him learn, let him learn,
Time that trains Chickens up, will teach him quickly
Why hoe's a Judge, an old man.
Never too old.
To be a Gentleman; and he that is a judge
Can judge best what belongs to wounded honour;
There are my griefs he has cast away my causes,
In which he has bowed my reputation.
And therefore Judge, or no Judge,
Pray be ruled Sir,
This is the maddest thing —
You will not carry it,
I doe not tell you so, but if you may be persuaded
You know how you used me, when I would not fight,
Doe you remember Gentleman?
The Devils in him.
I see it in your eyes, that you dare it
You have a carrying face, and you shall carry it,
The least is banishment
Be banished then;
It is a friends part, we'll meet in Africa,
Or any corner of the earth.
Say he will not fight,
I know then what to say take you no care Sir,
Well, I will carry it, and deliver it,
And to morrow morning meet you in the lover,
Till when, my service,
A Judge, or no Judge, no Judge. 
This is the prettiest Rogue that here I read of,
None to provoke tot'h field, but the old president;
What face shall I put on? if I come in earnest,
I am sure to wear a pair of bracelets;
This may make some sport yet, I will deliver it
Here comes the president.
I shall find time Gentlemen,
To doe your causes good, is not that Cleremont.
It is he my Lord?
Why does he smile upon me?
Am I become ridiculous? has your fortune Sir
Upon my son made you contemn his Father?
The glory of a Gentleman, is fair bearing,
Mistake me not my Lord, you shall not find that;
I come with no blown spirit to abuse you,
I know your place, and honour due unto it,
The reverence to your silver age and virtue,
Your face is merry still.
So is my business,
And I beseech your honour, mistake me not
I have brought you from a wild, or rather mad man
As mad a peace — of you were wont to love mirth,
In your young days, I have known your honour wo it
This may be made no little one, it is a challenge Sir,
Nay start not I beseech you, it means you no harm
Nor any man of honour, or understanding
It is to steal from your serious hours a little laughters
I am bold to bring it to your Lordship,
It is to me indeed.
Doe they take me for a sword man, at these years?
It is only worth your honours mirth thats all Sir,
'Tad bin in me else a saucy rudeness.
From one La-Writ, a very punctual challenge,
But if your Lordship mark it, no great matter
I have known such a wrangling advocate,
Such a little figent thiing; Oh I remember him,
A notable talking knave, now out upon him,
Has challenged me down right, defied me mortally
I doe remember too, I cast his causes
Why ther's the quarrel Sir, the mortal quarrel
Why what a knave is this? as you're? Gentleman
Is there no further purpose but mere mirth?
What a bold man of war, he invites me roundly
If there should be, I were no Gentleman.
Nor worthy of the honour of my kindred,
And though I am sure your Lordship hate my person,
Which time may bring again into your favour,
Yet for my manners —
I am satisfied,
You see Sir, I have out li'v'd those days of fighting,
And therefore cannot do him the honour to beat him my self
But I have a kinsman, much of his ability
His wit and carriage, for this calls him fool,
One that will spit as senseless fire, as this fellow
And such a man to undertake, my Lord,
Nay hes too forward, these two pitch barrels together
Upon my soul no harm.
It makes me smile,
Why what a stinking smother will they utter?
Yes he shall undertake Sir, as my Champion,
Since you propound it mirth, i'll venture on it
And shall defend my cause, but as you're honest
Sport not with blood.
Think not so basely, good Sir,
A squire shall waite upon you from my kinsman,
To morrow morning, make your sport at full,
You want no subject, but no wounds.
That's my care
And so good day. 
Many unto your honour,
This is a noble fellow of a sweet spirit,
Now must I think how to contrive this matter,
For together they shall go. 
O Cleremont
I am glad I have found thee,
I can tell thee rare things,
O I can tell thee rarer,
Dost thou love me?
Love thee?
Doest thou love me dearly
Dare thou for my sake?
Any thing that's honest
Though it be dangerous
Pox o dangerous
Nay wondrous dangerous.
Wilt thou break my heart?
Along with me then.
I must part to morrow.
You shall, you shall, be faithful for this night
And thou hast made thy friend.
Away and talk not
O Nurse welcome, whore's Dinant?
Hee is at my back
It is the most liberal Gentleman, this gold,
He gave me for my pains, nor can I blame you,
If you yield up the for it
How? yield it up?
I know not, he that loves, and gives so largely,
And a young Lord to boot, or I am consent
May enter every where,
Thou't make me angry.
Why if you are I hope here is on will please you,
Look on him with my eyes, good luck go with you
Were I young for your sake. —
I thank thee Nurse,
I would be tractable, and as I am —
Leave the room,
So old, and so immodest? and be careful,
Since whispers will make sleeping jealousies.
That none disturb my Lord. 
Will you dispatch?
Till you come to the matter be not rapt thus,
Walk in, walk in, I am your scout for once,
You owe me the like service,
And will pay it,
As you respect our lives, speak not so loud
Why, to it in dumb show then, I am silenced
Be not so hasty Sir, the golden apples,
Had a fell dragon for their guard, your pleasures
Are to be attempted with Herculean danger,
Or never to be gotten
Speak the means,
Thus briefly my Lord sleeps now, and alas,
Each night he only sleeps.
Go keep her stirring,
Now if he wake, as sometimes he does,
He only stretches out his hand and feels,
Whether I am a bed, which being assured of
He sleeps again; But should he miss me, valour
Could not defend our lives,
Wha'ts to be done then?
Servants have servile Faiths, nor have I any
That I dare trust; on noble Cleremont
We safely may rely
What man can doe,
Command and boldly,
Thus then in my place,
You must lye with my Lord,
With an old man?
Two beards together? that's prepostrous.
There is no other way, and though it is dangerous
He having servants within call; and armed too,
Slaves feed to act, all that his jealousy,
And rage commands them, yet a true friend should not
Check at the hazard of a life,
I thank you,
I love my friend, but know no reason why
To hate my self, to be a kind of pander,
You see I am willing,
But to betray mine own throat you must pardon,
Then I am lost, and all my hopes defeated
Were I to hazard ten times more for you,
You should find, Cleremont —
You shall not out doe me,
Fall what may fall, i'll do it
But for his beard —
To cover that you shall have my night Linen,
And you disposed of, my Dinant and I,
Will have some private conference.
Private doing,
Or i'll not venture,
That's as we agree. 
What can this Woman do, preserving her honour?
I have given her all the liberty that may be
I will not be far off though; nor I will not be jealous
Nor trust too much, I think she is virtuous,
Yet when I hold her best, she's but a woman,
As full of frailty as of Faith, a poor slight woman,
And her best thoughts, but weak fortifications,
There may be a mean wrought. Well, let'em work then,
I shall meet with it: till the signs be monstrous,
And stick upon my head, I will not believe it, 
She may be &amp; she may not: now to my observation.
Why do you make me stay so? if you love me—
You are too hot, and violent.
Why doe you shift thus
From one chamber to another?
A little delay, sir,
Like fire, a little sprinkled ore with water,
Makes the desires burn c•ear, and ten times hotter.
Why doe you speak so loud? I pray go in
Sweet Mistress I am mad, time steals away,
And when we would enjoy—.
Now fie, fie servant, 
Like sensual beasts, shall we enjoy our pleasures?
Pray doe but kiss me then.
Why, that I will, and you shall find anon, servant.
oftly for heavens sake, you know my friend's engaged,
A little now, now; Will you go in again?
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
Why doe you laugh so loud? precious,
Will you betray me? ha my friends throat cut?
Come, come, I'll kiss thee again.
Will you so? you are liberal,
If you doe cozen me —
What's this?
Wine, wine, a draught or two.
What does this woman here?
She shall not hinder you.
This might have bin spared,
It is but delay, and time lost: pray send her softly off.
Sit down, and mix your spirits with Wine,
I will make you another Hercules.
I dare not drink;
Fie, what delays you make? I dare not, 
I shall be drunk presently and do strange things then.
Not drink a cup with your Mistress? ô the pleasure.
Lady, why this? 
We must have mirth to our wine, man.
Pl— of the Music.
God-a-mercy Wench,
If thou dost Cuckold me, I shall forgive thee.
The house will all rise now, this will disturb all.
Did you doe this?
Peace, and sit quiet, fool,
You love me, come, sit down and drink.
What a devil ail you?
How cold I sweat? a hogs pox, stop your pipes, 
The thing will wake: now, now me thinks I find
His Sword just gliding through my throat: VVhat's that?
A vengeance choke your pipes. Are you there Lady?
Stop, stop those rascals; doe you bring me hither
To be cut into minced meat? Why Dinant?
I cannot doe withal;
I have spoke, and spoke: I am betrayed, and lost too.
Doe you hear me? do you understand me?
Plague dam your whistles. 
It was but an over-sight, they have done, lie down.
Would you had done too.
You know not
In what a misery, and fear I lie.
You have a Lady in your arms.
I would have— 
I'll watch you, goodman wood have.
Remove for heavens sake,
And fall to that you come for.
Lie you down,
It is but an hours endurance now.
I dare not, softly sweet Lady,—heart?
It is nothing but your fear, he sleeps still soundly,
Lie gently down.
'Pray make an end.
Come, Madam.
These Chambers are too near. 
I shall be nearer;
Well, go thy ways. I'll trust thee through the world,
Deal how thou wilt: that that I never feel,
I'll never fear. Yet by the honour of a Soldier,
I hold thee truly Noble. How these things will look,
And how their bloods will curdle? play on children,
You shall have pap anon. O thou grand fool,
That thou know, but thy fortune — 
Peace, good Madam,
Stop her mouth Dinant, it sleeps yet, pray be wary,
Dispatch, I cannot endure this misery,
I can hear nothing more; I'll say my prayers,
And down again— 
A thousand larums, fall upon my quarter,
Heaven send me off; When I lie keeping courses.
Pl— of your fumbling Dinant; how I shake?
It is still again. Would I were in the Indies. 
Why doe ye use me thus? thus poorly? basely?
Work me into a hope, and then destroy me?
Why did you send for me? this new way train me?
Madman, a fool, &amp; false man, now Isle show thee man
Pray put your light out.
No I'll hold it thus,
That all chaste eyes, may see thy lust, and scorn it,
Tell me but this, when you first doted on me,
And made suite to enjoy me, as your wife,
Did you not hold me honest?
Yes, most virtuous.
And did not that appear, the only lustre
That made me worth your love, and admiration?
I must confess—
Why would you deal so basely?
So like a thief? a villain?
Peace, good Madam.
I'll speak aloud too; thus maliciously,
Thus breaking all the rules of honesty,
Of honour, and of truth, for which I loved you,
For which, I called you servant, and admired you,
To steal that jewel, purchased by another
Piously set in Wedlock, even that Jewel,
Because it had no flame, you held unvaluable:
Can he that has loved good, dote on the devil?
For he that seeks a whore, seeks but his agent:
Or am I of so wild, and low of blood,
So nursed in infamies?
I doe not think so,
And I repent.
That will not serve your turn, sir.
It was your treaty drew me on.
But it was your villainy,
Made you pursue it: I drew you but to try
How much a man, and nobly you durst stand,
How well you had deserved the name of virtuous;
But you, like a wild torrent, mixed with all
Beastly and base affections came floating on,
Swelling your poisoned billows—
Will you betray me?
To all the miseries, a vexed woman may.
Let me but out,
Give me but room to toss my sword about me,
And I will tell you, you're a treacherous woman,
O that I had but words!
They will not serve you.
But two-edg'd words to cut thee; a Lady traitor?
Perish by a proud puppet? I did you too much honour,
To tender you my love, too much respected you,
To think you worthy of my worst embraces.
Go, take your groom, and let him dally with you,
Your greasy groom; I scorn to imp your lame stock,
You are not fair, nor handsome, I lied loudly.
This tongue abused you, when it spoke you beauteous.
It is very well, it is brave.
Put out your light,
Your ascivious eyes, are flames enough
For fools to find you out: a Lady plotter?
Must I begin, your sacrifice of mischief?
I and my friend, the first fruits of that blood,
You and your honourable Husband aim at?
Crooked and wretched you are both.
To you, sir,
Yet to the eye of Justice, straight as Truth.
Is this a women's love? a women's mercy?
Do you profess this seriously? doe you laugh at me?
Ha, ha.
Pl— light upon your scorns, upon your flatteries
U•on your tempting faces, all destructions:
A bedrid Winter hang upon your cheeks,
And blast, blast, blast, those buds of pride that point you;
Death in your eyes to fright men from these dangers.
Raise up your trophy Cleremont.
What a vengeance aisle you?
What dismal noise, is there, no honour in you?
Cleremont, we are betrayed, betrayed, sold by a woman,
Deal bravely for thy self.
This comes of rutting:
Are we made stales to one another?
Yes, we are undone, lost.
You shall pay for it grey-beard:
Up up, you sleep your last else. 
No not yet, sir,
Lady, look up: would you have wronged this beauty?
Wake so tender a Virgin, with rough terms?
You wear a sword; we must entreat you leave it.
Fie sir, so sweet a Lady?
Was this my bed-fellow? pray give me leave to look,
I am not mad yet, I may be, by and by.
Did this lie by me?
Did I fear this? is this a cause to shake at?
Away with me for shame, I am a rascal.
I am amazed too.
We'll recover you.
You walk like Robin-good-fellow, all the house over
And every man afraid of you.
It is well Lady.
The honour of this deed, will be your own,
The world shall know your bounty.
What shall we doe with 'em?
Geld me,
For it is not fit I should be a man again,
I am an Ass, a Dog.
Take your revenges,
You know my Husbands wrongs, and your own losses.
A brave man, an admirable brave man;
Well, well, I would not be so tried again;
A very handsome proper gentleman.
Will you let me lie by her, but one hour more,
And then hang me?
Wee wait your malice, put your swords home bravely,
You have reason to seek blood.
Not as you are Noble.
Hands off and give them liberty, only disarm 'em.
We have done that already.
You are welcome gentlemen,
I am glad my house, has any pleasure for you,
I keep a couple of Ladies here, they say fair,
And you are young, and handsome gentlemen;
Have you any more mind to Wenches?
To be abused too? Lady, you might have helped this,
Sir now it is past, but 't may be I may stand,
Your friend hereafter, in a greater matter.
Never whilst you live.
You cannot tell—now sir a parting hand.
Down and Roses:
Well, I may live to see you again. A dull rogue,
No revelation in thee.
Were you well frighted?
Were your fits, from the heart, of all colds and colours?
That's all your punishment.
It might have bin all yours,
Had not a blockhead undertaken it.
Your swords you must leave to these gentlemen.
And now, when you dare fight,
We are on even Ice again.
It is well:
To be a Mistress, is to be a monster,
And so I leave your house, and you for ever.
Leave your wild lusts, and then you are a master.
You may depart too.
I had rather stay here.
Faith we shall fright you worse.
Not in that manner,
There's five hundred crowns, fright me but so again.
Come Cleremont, this is the hour of fool.
Wiser the next shall be or we'll to school. 
How coolely these hot gallants are departed?
Faith cousin it was unconscionably done,
To lie so still and so long.
It was your pleasure,
If it were a fault I may hereafter mend.
O, My best Wife.
Take now what course thou wilt, and lead what life.
The more trust you commit, the more care still,
Goodness and virtue, shall attend my will.
Let's laugh this night out now &amp; contour gains,
We have our honours home, and they their pains.
It holds, they will go thither.
To their Summer house?
Thither in the evening, and which is the most infliction,
Only to insult upon our miseries.
Are you provided?
Yes, yes.
Thoroughly?
Thoroughly.
Basta enough, I have your mind, I will not fail you.
At such an hour.
Have I a memory?
A Cause, and Will to doe? thou art so sullen—
And shall be, till I have a fair reparation.
I have more reason, for I scoped a fortune,
Wh ch if I come so near again: I say nothing,
But if I sweat not in another fashion—
O, a delicate Wench.
It is certain a most handsome one.
And me thought the thing was angry with it self too
It lay so long concea•d but I must part with you,
I have a scene of mirth, to drive this from my heart,
And my hour is come.
Miss not your time.
I dare not. 
I presume, sir, you now need no instruction,
But fairly know, what belongs to a Gentleman;
You bear your Uncles cause.
Doe not disturb me,
I understand my cause, and the right carriage.
Be not too bloody.
As I find my enemy; if his sword bite,
If it bite, sir, you must pardon me.
No doubt he is valiant,
He durst not undertake else,
Hoe's most welcome,
As he is most valiant, he were no man for me else.
But say he should relent.
Hee dies relenting,
I cannot help it, he must die relenting,
If he pray, praying ipso facto, praying,
Your honourable way, admits no prayer,
And if he sight, he falls, there's his quiet us.
You're nobly punctual, let's retire and meet 'em,
But still, I say, have mercy.
I say, honour. 
Will not you go sweet-heart?
Go? I'll fly with thee,
I stay behind?
My Father will be there too,
And all our best friends,
And if we be not merry,
We have hard luck, Lady.
Faith let's have a kind of play.
What shall it be?
The story of Dinant.
With the merry conceits of Cleremont,
His fits and Fevers.
But I'll lie still no more.
That, as you make the Play, twill be rare sport,
And how twill vex my gallants, when they hear it?
Have you given order for the Coach?
Yes, Madam.
My easy Nag, and padd.
It is making ready.
Where are your horses?
Ready at an hour, sir: we'll not be last.
Fie, what a night shall we have?
A roaring, merry night.
We'll fly at all, sir.
I'll fly at thee too, finely, and so ruffle thee,
I'll try your Art, upon a Country pallet.
Brag not too much, for fear I should expect it,
Then if you fail—
Thou says too true, we all talk,
But let's in, and prepare, and after dinner
Begin our mirthful pilgrimage.
He that's sad,
A crab-fac'd Mistress cleave to him for this year. 
Since it cannot be the Judge—
It is a great deal better.
You are sure, he is his kinsman? a gentleman?
As arrant a gentleman, and a brave fellow,
And so near to his blood—
It shall suffice,
I'll set him further off, I'll give a remove
Shall quit his kindred, I'll lop him.
Will ye kill him?
And there were no more cousins in the world I kill him,
I do mean, sir, to kill all my Lords kindred.
For every Cause a cousin.
How if he have no more cousins.
The next a kin then, to his Lordships favour,
The man he smiles upon.
Why this is vengeance, horrid, and dire.
I love a dire revenge:
Give me the man, that will all others kill,
And last himself,
You stole that resolution.
I had it in a Play, but that's all one,
I wooed see it done.
Come, you must be more merciful.
To no Lords cousins in the world, I hate 'em;
A Lords cousin to me is a kind of Cocatrice,
If I see him first, he dies.
A strange Antipathy,
What think you of their Nieces?
If I like 'em,
They may live, and multiply; it is a cold morning.
It is sharpe indeed; you have broke your fast.
No verily.
Your valour would have asked a good foundation.
Hang him, I'll kill him fasting.
Here they come,
Bear your self in your language, smooth and gently,
When your swords argue.
'Pray sir spare your precepts.
I have brought you sir—
It is very well, no words,
You are welcome, sir.
I thank you, sir, few words.
I'll kill you for your Uncles sake.
I love you,
I'll cut your throat, for your own sake.
I esteem of you.
Let's render 'em honest, and fair, gentlemen,
Search my friend, I'll search yours.
That's quickly done.
You come with no spells, nor witchcrafts?
I come fairly, to kill him honestly.
Hang Spells, and Witchcrafts,
I come to kill my Lords Nephew like a gentleman,
And so I kiss his hand.
This doublet is too stiff.
Off woo't, I hate it,
And all such fortifications, feel my skin,
If that be stiff, flea that off too.
It is no soft one.
Off, woo't, I say:
I'll fight with him, like a flayed Catt.
You are well, you are well. 
You must uncase too.
Yes, sir.
But tell me this, why should I mix mine honour
With a fellow, that has ne'er a lace in's shirt?
That's a maine point, my friend has two.
That's true, sir.
Base and degenerate cousin, doest not thou know
An old, and tattered colours, to the enemy,
Is of more honour, and shows more ominous?
This shirt, five times, victorious I have fought under,
And cut through squadrons, of your curious Cut-workes,
As I will doe through thine, shake, and be satisfied.
This is unanswerable.
But may I fight, with a foul shirt?
Most certain, so it be a fighting shirt,
Let it be ne'er so foul, or lousy, Caesar wore such a one.
Saint Denis then: I accept your shirt.
Not so forward, first you must talk,
It is a maine point, of the French method,
Talk civilly, and make your cause Authentic.
No weapon must be near you, nor no anger.
When you have done, then stir your resolutions,
Take to your Weapons bravely.
It is too cold;
This for a Summer fight.
Not for a world, you should transgress the rules.
It is peevish weather,
I had rather fight without.
An it were in a river.
Where both stood up to the chins.
Then let's talk quickly,
Pl— of this circumstance.
Are the Horses come yet?
Yes certain: give your swords to us, now civilly.
We'll stand a while off; take the things, &amp; leave 'em,
You know when, and let the children play:
This is a dainty time of year for puppies,
Would the old Lord were here.
He would die with laughter.
I am sorry I have no time, to see this game out,
Away, away.
Here's like to be a hot fight,
Call when you're fit. 
Why look you sir, you seem to be a gentleman,
And you come in honour of your Uncle, boh, boh, it is very cold;
Your Uncle has offered me some few affronts,
Past flesh and blood to bear: boh, boh, wondrous cold.
My Lord, mine Uncle, is an honourable man,
And what he offers, boh, boh, cold indeed,
Having made choice of me, an unworthy kinsman,
Yet, take me with you: boh, boh, pestlence cold,
Not altogether.
Boh, boh, I say altogether.
You say you know not what then: boh, boh, sir.
Sir me with your sword in your hand;
You have a scurvy Uncle, you have a most scurvy cause,
And you are — boh, boh.
Boh, boh, what?
A shitten scurvy Cousin.
Our Swords? our swords?
Thou art a dog, and like a dog: our swords?
Our weapons gentlemen: ha? wher's your second?
Whore's yours?
So ho? our weapons?
Wa, ha, ho, our weapons?
Our Doublets and our weapons, I am dead.
Firsts? second? third? a pl—be woo' you gentlemen
Are these the rules of honour? I am starved.
They are gone, and we are here; what shall we do?
O for a couple of faggots.
Hang a couple of faggots;
Dare thou take a killing cold with me?
I have it already.
Rogues, thieves, boh boh, run away with our Doublets?
To fight at Buffets now, it were such a May-game.
There were no honour in it, p— on it, it is scurvy.
Or to revenge my wrongs at fifty-cuffes.
My Lord, mine Uncles cause, depend on Boxes?
Let's go in quest, if ever we recover 'em.
I, come, our colds together, and our doublets.
Give me thy hand; thou art a valiant gentleman.
I say, if ever we recover 'em—
Let's get into a house and warm our hearts.
There's ne'er a house within this mile, beat me,
Kick me, and beat me as I go, and I'll beat thee too,
To keep us warm; if ever we recover 'em—
Kick hard, I am frozen: so, so, now I feel it.
I am dull yet.
I'll warm thee I'll warm thee.—Gentlemen,
Rogues, thieves, thieves: run, now I'll follow thee. 
Use legs, and have legs.
You that have legs say so,
I put my one to too much stress.
Your hearse, sir,
Will meet you within half a mile,
I like
The walk so well, I should not miss my Coach,
Though it were further. Annabell thou art sad:
What ails my Niece?
Shoe's still devising, sister,
How quietly her late bed-fellow lay by her.
Old as I am, he would have startled me,
Nor can you blame her.
Had I taken her place.
I know not, but I fear, I should have shrieked,
Though he had never offered—
Out upon thee,
Thou would have taught him.
I think, with your pardon,
That you wish now you had.
I am glad. I yield you
Such ample scope of mirth.
Nay, be not angry,
There's no ill meant: ha? Musique, and choice musique?
It is near us in the Grove what courteous bounty
Bestows it on us? my dancing days are done;
Yet I would thank the giver, did I know him.
It is questionless, some one of your own Village,
That hearing of your purposed journey thither,
Prepares it for your entertainment, and
The honour of my Lady.
I think rather,
Some of your Lordships Clients.
What say you Cousin?
If they should prove your Suitors?
That's most likely.
I say, if you are noble, be it who will;
Go presently and thank 'em: I can jump yet,
Or tread a measure.
Like a Millers Mare.
I warrant you well enough to serve the Country,
I'll make one, and lead the way. 
Doe you note,
How zealous the old Crone is?
And you titter
As eagerly as she: come sweet, we'll follow,
No ill can be intended. 
I ne'er feared yet. 
THis way, this way, come and hear,
You that hold, these pleasures dear,
Fill your ears, with our sweet sound,
Whilst we melt the frozen ground:
This way come, make hast ô fair,
Let your clear eyes gild the air;
Come and bless us with your sight,
This way, this way seek delight.
They are ours but draw them on a little further
From the foot-path into the neighbouring thicket,
And we may do it, as safe, as in a Castle.
They follow still; the President, Vertaigne
Comes on apace, and Champernell limps after;
The women, as if they had wings, and walked
Upon the ayre, fly to us.
They are welcome,
We'll make 'em sport; make a stand here, all know
How we are to proceed.
We are instructed. 
One strain or two more. 
Excellent, they are come,
We cannot miss, in such a business, yet
Mine ear ne'er failed me. 
Would we were at it once,
I doe not walk, but dance.
You shall have dancing.
Begin, and when I give the word—
No more.
Wear instructed. 
But win us fairly— 
O sir, We do not come to try your valour,
But to possess you, yet we use you kindly
In that, like English thieves, wee kill you not,
But are contented with the spoil.
Oh heaven!
How hath mine age deserved this?
Hell confound it,
This comes of walking; had I kept my legs,
My legs in my good house, my Armour on,
My Staff in my rest, and this good sword too, friend,
How I would break and scatter these.
Ha, ha, ha.
Doe you scorn me rogues?
Nay, Gentlemen, kind gentlemen,
Or honest keepers of these woods, but hear me,
Be not so rough; if you are taken with
My beauty, as it hath bin worth the seeking,
Some one or two of you, try me in private,
You shall not find me squeamish.
Doe not kill me,
And doe your worst, I'll suffer.
Peace vile creatures.
Do you know me, or my place that you presume not
To touch my person?
If you are well, rest so,
Provoke not angry wasps.
You are Wasps indeed,
Never created to yield VVax, or honey,
But for your Countries torment, yet are, if men,
As you seem such in shape, if true borne French-men,
How ever want compels you to these courses,
Rest satisfied with what you can take from us,
(These Ladies honours, and our liberties safe)
We freely give it.
You give but our own.
Look on these grey hairs, as you would be old,
Their tears, as you would have yours to find mercy,
When Justice shall o'retake you.
Look on me,,
Look on me rascals, and learn of me too,
That have bin in some part of your profession,
Before that most of you ere sucked I know it,
I have rode hard, and late too.
Take heed, sir.
Then use me, like a brother of the trade,
For I have been at Sea, as you on land are,
Restore my Matrimony undefiled,
Wrong not my Niece. and for our gold or silver,
If I pursue you, hang me.
It is well offered,
And as I said, sweet gentlemen, with sour faces,
If you are high, and want some sport, or so,
(As living without action here, you may doe)
Forbear their tender grissells, they are meat
Will wash away, there is no substance in it,
We that are expert in the game, and tough to,
Will hold you play.
This hen longs to be trodden.
Lackey my horse.
This way, I heard the cries
Of distressed women.
Stand upon your guard.
VVho's here? my witty, scornful Lady-plot?
In the hands of ruffians,
And my fine cold virgin,
That was insensible of man, and woman?
Justice too,
Without a sword to guard it self?
And valour with its hands bound?
And the great Soldier dull?
Why this is strange;
Dinant as thou art noble —
As thou art valiant Cleremont. —
As ever I appeared lovely —
As you ever hope,
For what I would give gladly —
Pretty conjurations,
All injuries, a little laid behind you
Show your selves men, and help us
Though your many
And gross abuses of me, should more move me
To triumph in your miseries then relieve you, —
Yet that hereafter, you may know that I
The scorn and despised Dinant, knows what does.
Belong to honour, thus —
I will say little, 
Speak thou for me,
It is bravely fought,
Brave tempers,
To doe thus for their enemies.
They are lost yet,
You that would rescue others, shall now feel
What they were borne to,
Hurry them away. 
That I could follow them,
I only can lament my fortune, and desire of heaven
A little life for my revenge.
The provost,
Shall fire the woods, but I will find i'm out,
No cave, no rock, nor hell shall keep them from
My searching vengeance.
O cold! o fearful cold! plague of all seconds,
O for a pint of burnt wine, or a sip
Of aqua fortis.
The rogues have met with these two
Upon my life and robbed 'em
As you are honourable Gentlemen,
Impart unto a couple of cold combatants,
My Lord, mine uncle as I live,
Pox take him.
How that word, has warm,d my mouth?
Why how now Cousin?
Why, why? and where man, bave you bin? at a Poulters
That you are cass'd thus like a rabbit? I could laugh now,
And I shall laugh, for all I have lost my Children,
Laugh monstruously
What are they?
Give me leave Sir,
Laugh more and more, never leave laughing,
Why Sir?
Why it is such a thing I smell it Sir, I smell it,
Such a ridiculous thing, —
Do you laugh at me my Lord?
I am very cold, but that should not be laughed at,
What art thou?
What art thou?
If he had his doublet. —
And his sword by his side, as a Gentleman ought to have
Peace Monsieur Simpson.
Come hither little Gentleman,
Base is the slave commanded: come to me
This is the little advocate
What advocate?
The little advocate that sent me a challenge,
I told you that my Nephew under took it,
And what t'was like to prove: now you see the issue.
Is this the little Lawyer?
You have a sword Sir,
And I have none, you have a doublet too,
That keeps you warm, and makes you merry,
If your Lordship knew.
The nature, and the nobleness of the Gentleman,
Though he show slight here, &amp; at what gusts of danger
His manhood has arrived,
Be it •hen.
Men's faces are foolish,
And often head long, over run their fortunes,
That little Lawyer, would so prick his ears up,
And bite your honour by the nose.
Say you so Sir?
So niggle about your grave shins Lord Vertaigne too
No more sweet Gentleman, no more of that Sir,
I will have more, I must have more.
Out with it.
Nay he is as brave a fellow.—
Have I caught you? 
Doe not kill him, doe not kill him.
No no, no, I will not
Doe you peep again, down down proud heart
O valour,
Look up brave friend, I have no means to rescue thee,
My Kingdom for a sword,
I'll sword you presently,
I'll claw your skin-coate too.
Away good Samson,
You go to grass else instantly,
But doe not murder my brave friend
Not one word,
If you doe sir, —
Must I go off dishonoured?
Adversity tries valour, so I leave thee. 
Are you a Lawyer Sir?
I was, I was Sir,
Nay never look, your Lawyers pate is broken
And your litigious blood, about your ears sir,
Why doe you fight and snarl?
I was possessed.
Isle disposesse you.
Ha ha ha.
Et tu Brute.
Beat him no more.
Alas Sir I must beat him,
Beat him into his business again, he will be lost else.
Then take your way,
Lie still, and doe not struggle,
I am patient,
I never saw my blood before, it jades me,
I have no more heart now then a goose.
Why sir, why do you leave your trade, your trade of living,
And send your challenges like thunderbolts,
To men of honoured place?
I understand Sir,
I never understood, before your beating,
Does this work on you?
Yes.
Doe you thank me for it?
As well as a beaten man can,
And doe you promise me,
To fall close to your trade again? leave brawling
If you will give me leave and life,
And ask this noble man forgiveness?
Heartily.
Rise then, and get you gone, and let me hear of you
As of an Advocate new vamped; no more words,
Get you off quickly, and make no murmurs
I shall pursue you else,
I have done sweet Gentlemen. 
But we forget our selves, our Friends and Children
We'll raise the coūtry first, then take our fortunes.
Shall I entereate for what I may command?
Think on my birth,
Here I am only Noble.
A King, and thou in my dominions fool,
A subject and a slave.
Be nor a Tyrant;
A ravisher of honour, gentle Sir,
And I will think ye such, and on my knees,
As to my Sovereign, pay a Subjects duty,
With prayers and tears,
I like this humble carriage.
I will walk by, but kneel you still and weep too,
It shows well, while I meditate on the prey,
Before I seize it.
Is there no mercy, heaven?
Not kiss you?
I will kiss and kiss again,
Savage will am!
My Innocence be my strength, I doe defy thee,
Thus scorn and spit at thee; will you come on Sir,
You are hot, there is a cooler,
A virago?
No, loathsome Goat, more, more I am that Goddess,
That here with whips of steel in hell hereafter
Scourge rape and theft,
I'll try your deity,
My chastity, and this knife held by a Virgin,
Against thy lust thy sword and thee a Beast.
Call on for the encounter.
Now what think you? 
Are you a Goddess?
In me their power suffers,
That should protect the Innocent,
I am all fire,
And thou shall quench it, and serve my pleasures,
Come partner in the spoil and the reward,
Let us enjoy our purchase
O Dinant!
O Heaven! o Husband!
O my Cleremont!
Two are our slaves they call on, bring 'em forth
As they are chaind together let them see
And suffer in the object.
While we sit
And without pity hear 'em
By my life,
I suffer more for thee then for my self,
Be a man Cleremont, and look upon 'em,
As such that not alone abused our service,
Fed us with hopes most bitter indigestion,
But when love failed, to draw on further mischief,
The baits they laid for us; were our own honours,
Which thus hath made us slaves too, worse then slaves
He dies
Pray hold, give him a little respite,
I see you now beyond expression wretched,
The wit you bragd of, foold, that boasted honour,
As you believed compassed with walls of brass,
To guard it sure, Subject to be o'er thrown
With the least blast of lust.
A most sad truth.
That confidence which was not to be shaken
In a perpetual fever, and those favours,
Which with so strong, and Ceremonious duty
Your lover and a Gentleman long sought for,
Sought, sued, and kneeled in vain for, must you yield up
To a licentious villain, that will hardly,
Allow you thanks for it
Something I must say too,
And to you pretty one, though crying one;
To be hanged now, when these worshipful benchers please
Though I know not their faces that condemn me,
A little startles me, but a man is nothing,
A Maidenhead is the thing, the thing all aim at;
Doe not you wish now, and wish from your heart too,
When scarce sweet with my fears, I long lay by you
Those fears you and your good Aunt put upon me,
To make you sport you had given a little hint,
A touch or so, to tell me I was mortal,
And by a mortal woman?
Pray you no more
If I had loosed that virgin Zone, observe me,
I would have hired the best of all our Poets
To have sung so much, and so well in the honour
Of that nights joy, that Ovids afternoon,
Nor his Corvina should again be mentioned,
I doe repent, and wish I had,
That's comfort,
But now. —
Another that will have it offered,
Compel it to be offered, shall enjoy it.
A rogue, a ruffian.
As you love your throat, —
Away with them.
O Cleremont!
O Dinant!
I can but add your sorrows to my sorrows,
Your fears to my fears,
To your wishes mine.
This slave may prove unable to perform,
Till I perform the task there I was borne for,
Amen, amen.
Drag the slaves hence, for you
A while i'll locke you up here study all ways
You can to please me, or the deed being done,
You are but dead.
This strong vault shall contain you
There think how many for your maidenhead
Have pined away, and be prepared to loose it
With penitence.
No humane help can save you.
Help, help?
You cry in vain, rocks cannot hear you.
O Cousin how I shake, all this long night,
What frights and noises we have heard still they increase
The villains put on shapes to torture us,
And to their Devils form such preparations
As if they were a hatching new dishonours,
And fatal ruin, past dull mans invention
Go not too far and pray good Cousin Anabell
Hark a new noise. 
They are exquisite in mischief.
I will go on this room gives no protection,
More then the next what's that? how sad and hollow,
The sound comes to us. 
Groaning? or singing is it?
The wind I think, murmuring amongst old rooms
Now it grows louder sure some sad ptesage
Of our foul loss — peep —, look now they peep,
Pox peep 'em.
O give them gentle language,
Give 'em rats-bane. 
Now they are above
I would they were i th Center,
Thou art so foolish desperate,
Since we must loose.
Call 'em brave fellows, Gentlemen,
Call 'em rogues,
Rogues as they are, rude rogues, uncivil villains
Look an thou wooed, beware dost thou feel the danger?
Till the danger feel me, this will I talk still,
And worse when that comes too; they cannot eat me
This is a punishment, upon our own prides,
Most justly laid; we must abuse brave Gentlemen,
Make 'em tame fools &amp; hobby-horses, laugh &amp; jeer at
Such men too, and so handsome and so Noble,
That howsoever we seemed to carry it
Wooed it were to doe again,
I doe confess cousin,
It was too harsh, too foolish
Doe you feel it?
Doe you find it now? take heed ot'h punishment,
We might have had two gallant Gentlemen,
Proper young, o how it tortures me
Two Devils now, two rascals two and twenty
O think not so
Nay an we scope so modestly —
May we be worthy any eyes, or knowledge,
When we are used thus?
Why not? why doe you cry!
Are we not women still? what were we made for?
But thus, thus basely —
It is against our wills,
And if there come a thousand so, —
Out on thee,
You are a fool, what we cannot resist,
Why should we grieve and blush for? there be women,
And they that bear the name of excellent women
Would give their whole estates, to meet this fortune
Hark, a new noise. 
Let 'em go on, I fear not,
If wrangling fighting and scratching cannot preserve me
Why so be it Cousin; if I be ordained
To breed a race of rogues. —
They come
Be firm,
They are welcome.
What mask of death is this? O my dear Brother
My coose to; why now you're glorious villains
O shall we loose our honours?
Let 'em go,
When death prepares the way, they are but Pageant•
Why must these dye?
Lament your own misfortunes
We perish happily before your ruins,
Has mischief ne'er a tongue?
Yes foolish woman,
Our Captains will is death.
You dare not doe it
Tell thy base boisterous Captain what I say,
Thy lawless Captain that he dares not;
Doe you laugh you rogue? you pamperd rogue?
Good Sir,
Good Cousin gently, as you're a Gentleman,—
A gentleman? a slave a dog the devils harbinger
Sir as you had a mother,
He a Mother?
Shame not the name of mother, a she Bear
A bloody old woolf bitch, a woman Mother?
Looks that rude lump, as if he had a mother?
Entreat him? hang him, do thy worst thou dare not,
Thou dare not wrong their lives, thy Captain dares not
They are persons of more price
What ere we suffer
Let not your angers wrong you,
You cannot suffer.
The men that doe this deed must live in the moon
Free from the gripe of Justice.
Is it not better?
Is it not better? let 'em go on like rascals
And put false faces on; they dare not doe it;
Flatter such scabs of nature,
Woman, woman
The next work is with you,
Unbind those Gentlemen,
And put their fatal fortunes, on our necks.
As you have mercy doe;
As you are monsters.
Fright us no more with shipwreck of our honours
Nor if there be a guilt by us committed
Let it endanger those,
I say they dare not,
There be a thousand gallouses, ye rogues,
Tortures, ye bloody rogues wheels,
A way.
Stay.
Stay,
Stay and i'll flatter too: good sweet faced Gentlemen
You excellent in honesty; o kinsmen!
O Noble kinsmen!
Away with 'em. 
Stay yet
The Devil and his lovely dam walk with you,
Come fortify your self, if they doe die,
Which all their ruggedness, cannot rack into me
They cannot find an hour more Innocent,
Nor more friends to revenge 'em.
Now stand constant,
For now our trials come,
This beauties mine
Your minute moves not yet,
She sinks if Christian,
If any spark of noble heate.—
Rise Lady
And fearless rise, there's no dishonour meant you,
Doe you know my tongue?
I have heard it,
Mark it better
I am one that loves you, fairly, nobly loves you
Look on my face?
O Sir?
No more words, softly
Hark, but hark wisely how, understand well,
Suspect not, fear not
You have brought me comfort
If you think me worthy of your Husband,
I am no rogue, nor Beggar if you dare doe thus —
You are Monsieur Cleremont,
I am the same
If you dare venture, speak, if not I leave you,
And leave you to the mercy of these villains
That will not woo ye much,
Save my reputation,
And free me from these slaves.
By this kiss i'll doe it
And from the least dishonour they dare aim at you
I have a priest too, shall be ready.
You are forward,
Is this my constant Cousin? how she whispers,
Kisses and hugs the thief.
You ll offer nothing
Till all be tied
Not as I am a Gentleman
Can you relieve my Aunt too?
Not yet Mistress.
But fear nothing all shall be well away quickly
It must be done in the moment or
I am with ye
I'll know now who sleeps by me, keep your stan∣ding
Well, go thy ways, &amp; thine own shame dwell with thee?
Is this the constancy she showed the bravery
The dear love and the life, she owed her kinsmen?
O brave tongue valiant glorious woman?
Is this the noble anger you arrived at?
Are these the thieves you scorned the rogues you rayld at?
The scabs and scums of nature? o fair modesty,
Excellent virtue, whither art thou fled?
What hand of heaven is over us, when strong virgins
Yield to their fears, and to their fears their fortunes?
Never belief come near me more, farewell wench,
A long farewell from all that ever knew thee
My turn is next,
I am resolved it comes
But in a nobler shape, ha?
Bless ye Lady
Indeed Sir. I had need of many blessings,
For all the hours I have had since I came here,
Have bin so many curses. How got you liberty?
For I presume you come to comfort me
To comfort you, and love you, it is most true,
My bondage was as yours, as full of bitterness
And every hour my death.
Heaven was your comfort.
Till the last evening, sitting full of sadness
Wailing, sweet Mistress, your unhappy fortunes
Mine own I had the least care of round about me,
The Captain, and the company stood gaping,
When I began the story of my love,
To you fair Saint, and with so full a sorrow,
Followed each point, that even from those rude eyes,
That never knew what pity meant or mercy
There stole down soft relentings, take heed Mistress,
And let not such unholy hearts out doe you,
The soft plumed god will see again thus taken,
As men transformed with the strange tale I told
They stood amazed then bid me rise and live,
Take liberty and means to see your person,
And wished me prosperous in your love, wish you so,
Be wise and loving Lady, show but you so
O Sir, are these fit hours, to talk of love in?
Shall we make fools of our afflictions?
Can any thing sound sweetly in mine ears,
Where all the noise of bloody horror?
My Brother, and my Cousin, they are dead Sir,
Dead, basely dead, is this an age to fool in?
And I my self, I know not what I shall be
Yet I must thank you and if happily
You had asked me yesterday, when these were living,
And my fears less, I might have hearkened to you,
Peace to your grief, I bind you to your word.
How? doe you conjure?
Not to raise dreadful apparitions, Madam,
But such as you would gladly see.
My Brother, and nephew living?
And both owe their lives,
To the favour of these Gentlemen,
Who deserve
Our service, and for us, your gracious thanks.
Which I give freely, and become a suitor,
To be hereafter more familiar. 
With such great worth and virtue,
Ever think us,
Your servants Madam.
Why if thou wilt needs know
How we are freed, I will discover it,
And with laconic brevity, these Gentlemen
This night encountering with those out laws that
Yesterday made us prisoners, and as we were
Attempted by 'em they with greater courage,
(I am sure with better fortune not alone,
Guarded themselves, but forced the bloody thieves,
Being got between them, and this hellish Cave,
For safety of their lives, to fly up higher
Into the woods, all left to their possession
This save your Brother, and your nephew from
The gibbet, this redeemed me from my Chains,
And gave my friend his liberty this preserved
Your honour ready to be lost.
But that
I know this for a lie, and that the thieves
And gentlemen, are the same men, by my practise,
Suborned to this he does deliver it
With such a constant brow, that I am doubtful,
I should believe him too.
If we did well,
We are rewarded.
Thanks but takes away
From what was freely purposed.
Now by this hand,
You have so cunningly discharged your parts,
That while we live, rest confident you shall
Command Dinant and Cleremont, nor Beaupr•,
Nor Verdoone scents it: for the Ladies, they
Were easy to be gul'd.
It was but a jest,
And yet the jest, may chance to break our necks
Should it be known.
Fear nothing.
Cleremont.
Say, what success?
As thou would wish, it is done Lad,
The grove will witness with me, that this night,
I lay not like a block: but how speed you?
I yet am in suspense, devise some means
To get these off, and speedily.
I have it,
Come, we are dull, I think that the good fellows,
Our predecessors in this place, were not
So foolish, and improvident husbands, but
Twill yield us meat, and wine.
Let's ransack it,
It is ours now, by the Law.
How say you sweet one,
Have you an appetite?
To walk again
In the Woods, if you think fit, rather then eat.
A little respite prithee; nay blush not,
You ask but whats your own, and warrantable
Monsier, Beaupre, Verdoone,
What think you of the motion?
Lead the way. 
We follow willingly.
When you shall think fit,
We will expect you.
Now be mistress of
Your promise Lady.
It was to give you hearing.
But that word hearing, did include a grant,
And you must make it good.
Must?
Must, and shall,
I will be fooled no more, you had your tricks;
Made properties, of me, and of my friend;
Presumed upon your power, and whipped me with
The rod of mine own dotage: doe not flatter
Your self, with hope, that any humane help
Can free you, and for aid by miracle;
A base unthankful woman is unworthy.
You will not force me?
Rather then injury you
With your consent because I will torment you;
I'll make you feel the effects of abused love,
And glory in your torture.
Brother, Nephew,
Help, help, for heavens sake.
Tear your throat, cry louder,
Though every leaf, these trees bear, were an Echo,
And summoned in your best friends to redeem you,
It should be fruitless: it is not that I love you,
Or value those delights you prize so high,
That I'll enjoy you, a French crown will buy
More sport, and a companion, to whom,
You in your best trim. are an Ethiope.
Forbear me then.
Not so, I'll do it in spite,
And break that stubborn disobedient will,
That hath so long held out, that boasted honour,
I will make equal with a common VVhores;
The spring of Chastity, that fed your pride,
And grew into a River of vain glory,
I will defile with mud, the mud of lust,
And make it loathsome even to goats.
O heaven!
No pity sir?
You taught me to be cruel,
And dare you think of mercy? I'll tell thee fool,
Those that surprised thee, were my instruments,
I can plot too, good Madam, you shall find it:
And in the stead of licking of my fingers,
Kneeling, and whining like a boy new breached,
To get a toy forsooth, not worth an apple,
Thus make my way, and with Authority,
Command what I would have.
I am lost for ever:
Good sir, I doe confess my fault, my gross fault,
And yield my self up, miserable guilty;
Thus kneeling, I confess, you cannot study
Sufficient punishments, to load me with;
I am in your power, and I confess again,
You cannot be too cruel: if there be,
Besides the loss of my long guarded honour,
Any thing else to make the balance even:
Pray put it in, all hopes, all helps have left me;
I am girt round with sorrow, hell's about me,
And ravishment, the least that I can look for,
Doe what you please.
Indeed I will doe nothing,
Nor touch, nor her• you Lady, nor had ever
Such a lewd purpose.
Can there be such goodness,
And in a man so injured?
Be confirmed in it.
I seal it thus: I must confess you vexed me,
In fooling me so often, and those fears,
You threw upon me, called for a requital,
Which now I have returned, all unchaste love
Dinant thus throws away; live to man-kind,
As you have done to me, and I will honour
Your virtue, and no more think of your beauty.
All I possess, comes short of satisfaction.
No complements: the terrors of this night
Imagine, but a fearful dream, and so
With ease forget it: for Dinant, that laboured
To blast your honour, is a Champion for it,
And will protect and guard it.
It is as safe then,
As if a complete Army undertook it. 
Do not persuade me gentle Monsier Simpson,
I am a mortal man again, a Lawyer,
My mortal part, I have put off.
Sweet Monsier,
Let but our honours teach us.
Monsier Simpson
My honourable friend, my valiant friend,
Be but so beaten-forward my brave Clients,
I am yours, and you are mine again, be but so thrashed,
Receive that Castigation with a cudgel.
Which calls upon us for a Reparation.
I have, it cost me half a crown, I bear it
All over me, I bear it Monsier Simpson;
The oils, and the old woman, that repairs to me,
To noint my beaten body.
It concerns you,
You have bin swinged.
Let it concern thee too;
Go and be beaten, speak scurvy words, as I did,
Speak to that Lion Lord, waken his anger,
And have a hundred Bastinado's, doe;
Three broken pates, thy teeth knocked out, doe Simpson,
Thy valiant arms and legs beaten to Poultesses,
Doe silly Simpson, doe.
You wrong the gentleman,
To put him out of his right mind thus:
You wrong us, and our Causes.
Down with him gentlemen,
Turn him, and beat him, if he break our peace,
Then when thou hast bin Lamed, thy small guts perished,
Then talk to me, before I scorn thy counsel,
Feel what I feel, and let my Lord repair thee.
And can the brave La-writ —
Tempt him no further,
Be warned and say no more.
If thou doest, Simpson,
Thou see my Mirmidons, I'll let 'em loose,
That in a moment—
I say nothing, sir, but I could wish—
They shall destroy thee wishing;
There's ne'er a man of these, but have lost ten Causes,
Dearer then ten men's lives; tempt, and thou die:
Go home, and smile upon my Lord, mine Uncle,
Take Money of the men thou meanest to Cozen,
Drink Wine, and eat good meat, and live discreetly,
Talk little, it is an Antidote against a beating;
Keep thy hand from thy sword, and from thy Laundress placket,
And thou wilt live long.
Give ear, and be instructed.
I find I am wiser then a Justice of Peace now,
Give me the wisdom that's beaten into a man
That sticks still by him: art thou a new man?
Yes, yes,
Thy learned precepts have enchanted me,
Go my son Simpson, I have now begot thee,
I'll send thee causes; speak to thy Lord, and live.
And lay my share by, go and live in peace,
Put on new suites, and show fit for thy place;
That man neglects his living, is an Ass: 
Farewell; come cheerly boys, about our business,
Now welcome tongue again, hang Swords.
Sweet Advocate. 
I know not wench, they may call'em what they will,
Outlaws, or thieves, but I am sure, to me
One was an honest man, he used me well,
What I did, it is no matter, he complained not.
I must confess, there was one bold with me too,
Some coy thing, would say rude, but it is no matter,
I was to pay a Waiting women's ransom,
And I have don't, and I would pay't again,
Were I taine to morrow
Alas, there was no hurt,
If it be a sin, for such as live at hard meat,
And keep a long Lent, in the woods as they doe,
To taste a little flesh,
God help the Courtiers,
That lie at rack and manger
I shall love
A thief the better for this while I live,
They are men of a charitable vocation,
And give where there is need, and with discretion,
And put a good speed penny in my purse,
That has bin empty twenty years,
Peace Nurse,
Farewell, and cry not roast meat, me thinks Cleremont
And my Lady Anabell are in one night,
Familiarly acquainted.
I observe it,
If she have got a penny too.
No more,
My Lord Monsieur Vertaigne the provost too,
Hast and acquaint my Lady, 
Wondrous strange,
It is true Sir, on my credit,
On mine honour,
I have bin provost-Marshall twenty years,
And have trussed up a thousand of these rascals,
But so ne'er Paris yet, I never met with,
One of that Brotherhood.
We to our cost have,
But will you search the wood
It is beset,
They cannot scope us, Nothing makes me wonder,
So much as having you within their power
They let you go; it was a Courtesy,
That French thieves use not often, I much pity
The Gentle Ladies, yet I know not how,
I rather hope then fear
Are these the prisoners?
We were such
Kill me not, excess of joy,
I see thou livest, but hast thou had no foul play
No on my soul, my usage hath bin noble,
Far from all violence,
How were you freed,
But kiss me first, we'll talk of that at leisure,
I am glad I have thee; Niece how you keep off,
As you knew me not?
Sir, I am where
I owe most duty
It is indeed most true Sir,
The man that should have bin your bed fellow
Your Lordships Bedfellow, that could not smell out
A Virgin of sixteen, that was your fool,
To make you merry, this poor simple fellow
Has met the maid again, and now she knows,
He is a man,
How! is she dishonoured?
Not unless marriage be dishonourable,
Heaven is a witness of our happy contract
And the next Priest we meet shall warrant it
To all the world: I lay with her in jest,
It is turned to earnest now.
Is this true Niece
Her blushing silence grants it; nay Sir storm not
He is my friend, and I can make this good,
His birth and fortunes equal hers, your Lordship
Might have sought out a worse we are all friends too,
All differences end thus. Now Sir, unless
You would raise new dissentions make perfect
What is so well begun
That were not manly,
Let me persuade you,
Well God give you joy,
She shall not come a Beggar to you Sir,
For you Monsieur Dinant here long i'll show you,
Another Neico, to this not much inferior,
As you shall like proceed
I thank you Sir,
Back then to Paris, well that travel ends
That makes of deadly enemies perfect friends.
TO promise much, before a play begin,
And when it is done, ask pardon, were a sin
We'll not be guilty of: and to excuse
Before we know a fault were to abuse
The writers and our selves, for I dare say
We all are foold if this be not a Play
And such a play as shall, (so should plays doe)
Imp times dull wings, and make you merry too
It was to that purpose writ, so we intend it
And we have our wished ends, if you commend it.
I Am sent forth to enquire what you decree
Of us and our Poets, they will be
This night exceeding merry, so will we
If you approve their labours. They profess
You are their patrons, and we say no less,
Resolve us then, for you can only tell
Whither we have done id'ly or done well.

