LEandro paid all.
It is his usual custom,
And requisite he should: he has now put off
The Funeral black, (your rich heirs wears with joy,
When he pretends to weep for his dead Father,)
Your gathering Sires, so long heap muck together,
That their kind Sons, to rid them of their care
Wish them in heaven; Or if they take a taste
Of Purgatory by the way, it matters not:
Provided they remove hence; What is befallen
To his Father, in the other world, I ask not,
I am sure his prayer is heard: would I could use one
For mine, in the same method.
Fie upon thee.
This is profane,
Good Doctor, doe not school me,
For a fault you are not free from: On my life
Were all Heirs in Corduba, put too their oaths
They would confess with me, it is a sound Tenet:
I am sure Leandro do it.
He is th'owner
Of a fair Estate.
And fairly he deserves it,
He's a royal Fellow: yet observes a mean
In all his courses, careful to on whom
He showers his bounties: he that's liberal
To all alike, may doe a Good by chance,
But never out of Judgement! This invites
The prime men of the City to frequent
All places he resorts to, and are happy
In his sweet Converse.
Don Jamie the Brother
To the Grandee Don Henrique, appears much taken
With his behaviour.
There is something more in it:
Hee needs his Purse, and knows how to make use on it,
It is now in fashion for your Don, that's poor,
To vow all Leagues of friendship with a Merchant
That can supply his wants, and howsoe're
Don Jamie's noble borne, his elder Brother
Don Henrique rich and his Revenues long since
Increasing by marrying with a wealthy Heir
Called Madam Violante, he yet holds
A hard hand o'er Jamie, allowing him
A bare annuity only.
Yet it is said
He hath no child, and by the Laws of Spain
If he die without issue, Don Iamie
Inherits his Estate.
Why that's the reason
Of their so many jars: Though the young Lord
Be sick of the elder Brother, and in reason
Should flatter, and observe him, he's of a nature
Too bold and fierce, to stoop so, but bears up,
Presuming on his hopes.
What's the young Lad
That all of em make so much of?
It is a sweet-One,
And the best conditioned youth, I ever saw yet,
So humble and so affable, that he wins
The love of all that know him, and so modest,
That (in despite of poverty) he would starve
Rather then ask a curtsy; He's the Son
Of a poor cast-Captaine, one Octavio
And She, that once was called the fair Iacinta,
Is happy in being his Mother: for his sake.
(Though in their Fortunes fallen) they are esteemed of,
And cherished by the best. O here they come,
I now may spare his Character, but observe him,
He will justify my report.
My good Ascanio
Repair more often to me: above Women
Thou ever shalt be welcome.
My Lord your favours
May quickly teach a raw untutored Youth
To be both rude and saucy.
You cannot be
Too frequent where you are so much desired:
And give me leave (dear friend) to be your Rival
In part of his Affection; I will buy it
At any rate.
Stood I but now possessed
Of what my future hope presages to me,
I then would make it clear thou had a Patron
That would not say but do: yet as I am,
Be mine, I'll not receive thee as a servant,
But as my Son (and though I want my self)
No Page attending in the Court of Spain
Shall find a kinder master.
I beseech you
That my refusal of so great an offer
May make no ill construction, it is not pride
(That common vice is far from my condition)
That makes you a denial to receive
A favour I should sue for: nor the fashion
Which the country follows, in which to be a servant
In those that groan beneath the heavy weight
Of poverty is held an argument
Of a base and abject mind, I wish my years
Were fit to do you service in a nature
That might become a Gentleman (give me leave
To think my self one) My father served the King
As a Captain in the field; and though his fortune
Returned him home a poor man, he was rich
In reputation, and wounds fairly taken.
Nor am I by his ill success deterred,
I rather feel a strong desire that sways me
To follow his Profession, and if heaven
Hath marked me out to be a man, how proud,
In the service of my Country, should I be,
To trail a pike under your brave command.
There, I would follow you as a guide to honour,
Though all the horrors of the War made up
To stop my passage.
Thou art a hopeful Boy,
And it was bravely spoken: For this answer,
I love thee more then ever.
Pity such seeds
Of promising courage should not grow and prosper
What ever his reputed Parents bee,
He ha?????? a mind that speaks him right and noble.
You make him blush: it needs not sweet Ascanio,
We may hear praises when they are deserved,
Or modesty unwonted. By my life
I would add something to the building up
So fair a mind, and if till you are fit
To bear Arms in the field, you'll spend some years
In Salamanca, I'll supply your studies
With all conveniences.
Your goodness (Signiors)
And charitable favours overwhelm me.
If I were of your blood, you could not be
More tender of me: what then can I pay
(A poor boy and a stranger) but a heart
Bound to your service? with what willingness
I would receive (good Sir) your noble offer,
Heaven can bear witness for me: but alas
Should I embrace the means to raise my fortunes,
I must destroy the lives of my poor Parents
(To whom I ow my being) they in me
Place all their comforts, and (as if I were
The light of their dim eyes) are so indulgent
They cannot brook one short days absence from me;
And (what will hardly win belief) though young,
I am their steward and their nurse: the bounties
Which others bestow on me serves to sustain 'em,
And to forsake them in their age, in me
Were more then murder.
This is a kind of begging
Would make a Broker charitable.
Here (sweet heart)
I wish that it were more.
When this is spent,
Seek for supply from me
Thy piety
For ever be remembered: nay take all,
Though 't were my exhibition to a Royal
For one whole year.
High heavens reward your goodness.
So Sir, is this a slip of your own grafting,
You are so prodigal?
A slip Sir?
Yes,
A slip; or call it by the proper name
Your Bastard.
You are foul-mouth'd; do not provoke me,
I shall forget your Birth, if you proceed,
And use you, (as your manners do deserve) uncivilly.
So brave? pray you give me hearing,
Who am I Sir?
My elder Brother: One
That might have been born a fool and so reputed,
But that you had the luck to creep into
The world a year before me.
Be more temperate.
I neither can nor will, unless I learn it
By this example: let him use his harsh
Unsavoury reprehensions upon those
That are his hinds, and not on me. The Land
Our father left to him alone rewards him,
For being twelve months elder, let that be
Forgotten, and let his Parasites remember
One quality of worth or virtue in him
That may authorise him, to be a censurer
Of me, or of my manners, and I will
Acknowledge him for a tutor, till then, never
From whom have you your means Sir?
From the will
Of my dead father; I am sure I spend not
Nor give it upon your purse.
But will it hold out
Without my help?
I am sure it shall I'll sink else
For sooner I will seek aid from a whore,
Then a curtsy from you.
It is well; you are proud of
Your new Exchequer when you have cheated him
And worn him to the quick, I may be found
In the List of your acquaintance'
Pray you hold
And give me leave (my Lord) to say thus much
(And in mine own defence) I am no Gull
To be wrought on by persuasion: nor no Coward
To be beaten out of my means, but know to whom
And why I give or lend, and will do nothing
But what my reason warrants; you may be
As sparing as you please, I must be bold
To make use of mine own, without your licence.
'Pray thee let him alone, he is not worth thy anger
All that he do's (Leandro) is for my good,
I think there's not a Gentleman of Spain,
That he's a better steward, then I have of him.
Your steward Sir?
Yes, and a provident one:
Why, he knows I am given to large Expense,
And therefore lays up for me: could you believe else
That he, that sixteen years hath worn the yoke
Of barren wedlock, without hope of issue.
(His Coffer's full, his Lands, and Vineyards fruitful)
Could be so sold to base, and sordid thrift,
As almost to deny himself, the means
And necessaries of life? Alas, he knows
The Laws of Spain appoint me for his heir,
That all must come to me, if I out-live him,
(Which sure I must doe, by the course of Nature,)
And the assistance of good Mirth, and Seck,
How ever you prove Melancholy.
If I live,
Thou dearly shalt repent this,
When thou art dead,
I am sure I shall not.
Now they begin to burn
Like opposed Meteors.
Give them line, and way,
My life for Don Jamie.
Continue still
The excellent Husband, and join Farm to Farm,
Suffer no Lordship, that in a clear day
Falls in the prospect of your coveteous eye
To be an others; Forget you are a Grandee
Take use upon use, and cut the throats of heirs
With cozening Mortgages: rack your poor Tenants,
Till they look like so many Skeletons
For want of Food; And when that Widows curses,
The ruins of ancient Families, tears of Orphans
Have hurried you to the devil, ever remember
All was raked up, for me, (your thankful Brother)
That will dance merrily upon your Grave,
And perhaps give a double Pistolet
To some poor needy Friar, to say a Mass
To keep your Ghost from walking.
That the Law
Should force me to endure this!
Verily,
When this shall come to pass (as sure it will)
If you can find a loope-hole, though in hell'
To look on my behaviour, you shall see me
Ransack your Iron Chests, and once again
Pluto's flame-colour'd Daughter shall be free
To domineer in Taverns, Masks, and Revels
As she was used, before she was your Captive.
Me thinks the mere conceit of it, should make you
Go home sick and distempered if it do's.
I'll send you a Doctor of mine own, and after
Take order for your Funeral.
You have said, sir,
I will not fight with words, but deeds to tame you,
Rest confident I will and thou shalt wish
This day thou had been dumb. ??? 
You have given him a heat.
But with your own distemper.
Not a whit
Now he is from mine eye, I can be merry,
Forget the cause, and him: all plagues go with him,
Let's talk of something else: what news is stirring?
Nothing to pass the time?
Faith it is said
That the next Summer will determine much
Of that we long have talked of, touching the Wars.
What have we to doe with them? Let us discourse
Of what concerns our selves. It is now in fashion
To have you Gallants set down, in a Tavern,
What the Arch-Dukes purpose is the next spring &amp; what
Defence my Lords (the States) prepare: what course
The Emperor takes against the encroaching Turk,
And whither his Moony-Standards are designed
For Persia or Polonia: and all this
The wiser sort of State-Wormes seem to know
Better then their own Affairs: this is discourse
Fit for the Counsel it concerns; we are young,
And if that I might give the Theme, it were better
To talk of handsome women.
And that's one,
Almost as general.
Yet none agree
Who are the fairest.
Some prefer the French,
For their conceited Dressings: some the plump
Italian Bona-Robas some the State
That ours observe; and I have heard one swear,
(A merry friend of mine) that once in London,
He did enjoy the company of a Gamester,
(A common Gamester too) that in one night
Met him th'Italian, French, and Spanish ways,
And ended in the Dutch; for, to cool her self,
She kissed him drunk in the morning.
Wee may spare
The travel of our tongues in foreign Nations,
When in Corduba, if you dare give credit
To my report (for I have seen her, Gallants)
There lives a woman) of a mean birth too,
And meanly matched) whose all-excelling Form
Disdains comparison with any She
That puts in for a fair one, and though you borrow
From every Country of the Earth the best
Of those perfections, which the Climate yields
To help to make her up, if put in Balance,
This will weigh-downe the Scale.
You talk of wonders.
She is indeed a wonder, and so kept,
And, as the world deserved not to behold
What curious Nature made without a pattern,
Whose Copy she hath lost too, she's shut up,
Sequestered from the world.
Who is the owner
Of such a Jem? I am fired.
One Bartolus,
A wrangling Advocate.
A knave on Record.
I am sure he cheated me of the best part
Of my Estate.
Some Business calls me hence,
(And of importance) which denies me leisure
To give you his full character: In few words
(Though rich) he's covetous beyond expression,
And to increase his heap, will dare the Devil,
And all the plagues of darkness: and to these
So jealous, as if you would parallel
Old Argus to him, you must multiply
His Eyes an hundred times: of these, none sleep.
He that would charm the heaviest lid, must hire
A better Mercury, then Jove made use of:
Bless your selves from the thought of him and her
For twill be labour lost: So farewell Signiors.??? 
Leandro? in a dream? wake man for shame.
Trained into a fools paradise with a tale
Of an imagined Form,
Iamie is noble,
And with a forged Tale would not wrong his Friend,
Nor am I so much fired with lust as Envy,
That such a churl as Bartolus should reap
So sweet a harvest, half my State to any
To help me to a share.
Tush do not hope for
Impossibilities,
I must enjoy her,
And my prophetic love tells me I shall,
Lend me but your assistance;
Give it 'ore,
I would not have thee fooled
I have strange Engines,
Fashioning here: and Bartolus on the Anvil
Dissuade me not, but help me,
Take your fortune,
If you come off well; praise your wit, if not,
Expect to be the subject of our Laughter. 
You met Don Henrique.
Yes:
What comfort bring you?
Speak cheerfully: how did my Letter work?
On his hard temper? I am sure I wrote it,
So feelingly, and with the pen of sorrow,
That it must force Co???punction,
You are cozened;
Can you with one hand prop a falling Tower?
Or with the other stop theraging maine,
When it breaks in on the usurped Shore?
Or any thing that is impossible?
And then conclude that there is some way left,
To move him to compassion.
Is there a Justice
Or thunder (my Octavio) and he
Not sunk unto the center?
Good Iacinta.
With your long practised patience bear afflictions,
And by provoking it call not on Heavens anger,
He did not only scorn to read your Letter,
But (most inhumane as he is) he cursed you,
Cursed you most bitterly,
The bad mans charity,
Oh that I could forget there were a Tie,
In me, upon him! or the relief I seek,
(If given) were bounty in him, and not debt,
Debt of a dear account!
Touch not that string,
Twill but increase our Sorrow, and tame silence,
(The Balm of the oppressed) which hitherto
Hath eased your grieved soul, and preserved your fame,
Must be your Surgeon still.
If the contagion
Of my misfortunes had not spread it self,
Upon my Son Ascanio, though my wants
Were centupli'd upon ???y self, I could be patient:
But he is so good, I so miserable,
His pious care his duty, and obedience,
And all that can be wished for from a Son,
Discharged to me, and I, bard of all means,
To return any scruple of the debt
I owe him as a Mother, is a Torment,
Too painful to be borne.
I suffer with you,
In that; yet find in this assurance comfort,
High heaven ordains (whose purposes cannot alter)
Children that pay obedience to their Parents,
Shall never beg their Bread.
Here comes our joy,
Where has my dearest been?
I have made (Mother)
A fortunate voyage and brought home rich prize,
In a few hours: the owners too contented,
From whom I took it. See here is Gold, good store too
Nay pray you take it,
Men's Charities are so cold,
That if I knew not, thou were made of Goodness,
It would breed a jealousy in me by what means,
Thou came by such a sum
Were it ill got,
I am sure it could not be employed so well,
As to relieve your wants. Some noble Friends,
(Raised by heavens mercy to me, not my merits)
Bestowed it on me.
It were a sacrilege
To rob thee of their bounty, since they gave it,
To thy use only;
Buy thee brave Clothes with it
And fit thee for a fortune, and leave us,
To our necessities; why dost thou weep?
Out of my fear, I have offended you;
For had I not, I am sure you are too kind,
Not to accept the offer of my service,
In which I am a gainer; I have heard
My tutor say of all a iereall foul
The Storke's the Emblem of true piety,
Because when age hath seized upon her dam,
And made unfit for flight, the grateful young one
Takes her upon his back, provides her food,
Repaying so, her tender care of him,
Here he was fit to fly, by bearing her:
Shall I then that have reason, and discourse
That tell me all I can doe is too little,
Be more unnatural then a silly Bird?
Or feed or cloth my self superfluously,
And know, nay see you want? holy Saints keep me.
Can I be wretched,
And know my self the Mother to such Goodness?
Come, let us dry our eyes, we'll have a Feast,
Thanks to our little Steward;
And in him,
Believe that we are rich.
I am sure I am,
While I have power to comfort you, and serve you.
Is it my fault (Don Henrique) or my fate,
Wha'ts my offence? I came young to your Bed
I had a fruitful Mother and you met me,
With equal ardour in your May of blood;
And why then am I barren?
It is not in Man
To yield a reason for the will of Heaven,
Which is inscrutable.
To what use serve
Full fortunes, and the meaner sort of Blessings,
When that, which is the Crown of all our wishes,
The period of humane happiness,
One only Child that may possess what's ours,
Is cruelly denied us?
It is the curse,
Of great Estates to want those Pledges which,
The poor are happy in: They in a Cottage,
With joy, behold the Modells of their youth,
And as their Root decays those budding Branches,
Sprout forth and flourish, to renew their age;
But this is the beginning, not the end
To me, of, that misery against my will,
(Since Heaven denies us Issue of our own)
Must leave the fruit of all my care and travel
To an unthankful Brother that insults,
On my Calamity.
I will rather choose,
A Bastard from the Hospital and adopt him,
And nourish him, as mine own.
Such an evasion
(My Violante) is forbid to us;
Happy the Roman State, where it was lawful,
(If our own Sons were vicious) to choose one
Out of a virtuous Stock, though of poor Parents,
And make him noble. But the Laws of Spain,
(Intending to preserve all ancient Houses)
Prevent such free elections; with this my Brothers
Too well acquainted, and this makes him bold to
Reign 'ore me, as a Master,
I will fire
The Portion I brought with me, here he spend,
A Royal of it: No Quirk left? no Quiddit
That may defeat him?
Were I but confirmed,
That you would take the means I use, with patience,
As I must practise it with my dishonour,
I could lay level with the earth his hopes
That soar above the clouds with expectation
To see me to my grave.
Effect but this
And our revenge shall be to us a Son
That shall inherit for us.
Do not repent
When it is too late.
I fear not what may fall
He dispossessed that doe's usurp on all 
Can any thing, but wonder?
Wonder on,
I am as ye see, and what will follow Gentlemen
Why dost thou put on this form? what can this do?
Thou look most sillily,
Like a young Clerk
A half pin'd-puppy that would write for a Royal.
Is this a commanding shape to win a Beauty?
To what use, what occasion?
Peace ye are fools,
More silly then my out-side seems ye are ignorant
They that pretend to wonders must weave cunningly.
What manner of access can this get? or if gotten
What credit in her eyes?
Will ye but leave me?
Me thinks a young man and a handsome Gentleman
(But sure thou art lunatic) me thinks a brave man
That would catch cunningly the beams of Beauty,
And so distribute 'em, unto his comfort,
Should like himself appear young, high, and buxom.
And in the brightest form.
Ye are cozened (Gentlemen)
Neither doe I believe this, nor will follow it,
Thus I am, I will begin my voyage,
When you love, launch it out in silks and velvets,
I le love in Serge, and will outgo our Satins
To get upon my great horse and appear.
The sign of such a man, and trot my measures,
Or fiddle out whole frosty nights (my friends)
Under the window, while my teeth keep tune,
I hold no handsomeness. Let me get in
There trot and fiddle where I may have fair play,
But how get in?
Leave that to me, your patience,
I have some toys here that I dare well trust to:
I have smelt a Vicar out, the call him Lopes.
You are ne'er the nearer now,
We do confess it.
Weak simple men, this Vicar to this Lawyer
Is the most inward, Demon.
What can this do?
We know the fellow, and he dwells there.
So.
A poor, thin thief: he help? he; hang the Vicar
Can reading of an???prefer thee?
Thou art dead-sick in love, and he will pray for thee
Have patience (Gentlemen) I say this Vicar,
This thing I say is all one with the Close Bartolus
(For so they call the Lawyer) or his nature
Which I have studied by relation;
And make no doubt I shall hit handsomely,
Will I work cunningly and home: understand me.
Next I pray leave me, Leave me to my fortune
Difficilia la, thats my Motto (Gentlemen)
I 'le win this Diamond from the rock and wear her
Or???
Peace, the Vicar: send ye a full sail, Sir.
There's your Confessor, but what shall be your penance? 
A fools head if I fail and so forsake me.
You shall hear from me daily.
We will be ready,
Thin world indeed:
I'll let him breathe and mark him:
No man would think a stranger as I am
Should reap any great commodity from his pigbelly,
Poor stirring for poor Vicars,
Diego And poor Sextons.
We pray and pray, but to no purpose
Those that enjoy our Lands, choke our Devotions.
Our poor thin stipends make us arrant dunces,
If you live miserably, how shall we do (Master?)
That are fed only with the sound of prayers?
We rise and ring the Bells to get good stomachs.
And must be fain to eat the ropes with reverence,
When was there a Christening (Diego?)
Not this ten weeks:
Alas, they have forgot to get children (Master)
The Wars, the Seas, and usury undo us,
Takes off our minds, our edges, blunts our plough-shares,
They eat nothing here, but herbs, &amp; get nothing but green sauce:
There are some poor Labourers, that perhaps
Once in seven year, with helping one another,
Produce some few pind???Butter???prints, that scarce hold
The christening neither.
Your Gallants, they get Honour,
A strange fantastical Birth, to defraud the Vicar,
And the Camp Christens their Issues, or the Courtesans,
It is a lewd time.
They are so hard-hearted here too,
They will not dye, there's nothing got by Burials.
Diego, the Ayre's too pure, they cannot perish:
To have a thin Stipend, and an everlasting Parish,
Lord what a torment it is!
Good sensible Master,
You are allowed to pray against all weathers,
(Both foul, and fair, as you shall find occasion)
Why not against all airs?
That's not in the Canons,
I would it had, it is out of our way forty pence.
It is strange, they are starved too yet they will not die here,
They will not Earth: a good stout plague amongst um,
Or half a dozen new fantastical Fevers
That would turn up their heals by whole-sale (Master)
And take the Doctors too, in their grave Counsels,
That there might be no natural help for money;
How merrily would my Bells go then?
Peace Diego
The Doctors are our friends, let's please them well,
For though they kill but slow, they are certain (Diego)
We must remove into a muddy Ayre,
A most contagious Climate.
We must certain,
An ayre that is the nursery of Agues,
Such Agues (Master) that will shake men's souls out,
Ne'er stay for Posits, nor good old wives plasters.
Gowts and dead Palsies.
The dead doe's well at all times,
Yet Gowts will hang an arsse a long time (Master)
The Pox, or English Surfeits if we had 'em;
Those are nich Marle, they make a Church-yard fat,
And make the Sexton sing, they never miss, Sir.
Then Wills and Funeral Sermons come in season,
And Feasts that makes us frolic.
Would I could see' em.
And though I weep in the Pulpit for my Brother,
Yet (Diego) here I laugh.
The cause requires it.
Since people left to die I am dunce (Diego.)
It is a strange thing, I have forgot to dig too.
A precious pair of youths; I must make toward 'em
Who's that? look out it seems he would speak to us.
I hope a Marriage, or some Will to make (Diego.)
My friend your business?
It is to that grave Gentleman;
Bless your good learning (Sir)
And bless you also,
He bears a promising face, there's some hope toward.
I have a Letter to your worship.
Well Sir,
From whence I pray you?
From Nova Hispania, Sir,
And from an ancient friend of yours.
It is well (Sir)
It is very well: the devil a-one I know there.
Take heed of a Snap (Sir) has a cozening countenance,
I doe not like his way.
Let him go forward.
Cantabit ??acuus, They that have nothing, fear nothing,
All I have to loose (Diego) is my learning,
And when he has gotten that, he may put it in a Nut shell,
SIgnior Lopes, Since my arrival from Cordova to these parts I have written divers Letters unto you but as yet received no Answer of any (Good, and very good) And although so great a forgetfulness might cause a want in my due correspondence yet the desire I have still to serve you must more prevail with me (Better and better: the devil a man know I yet) and therefore with the present occasion offered I am willing to crave a continuance of the favours, which I have heretofore received from you and doe recom???mend my Son Leandro the Bearer to you with request that he may be admitted in that University till such time as I shall arrive at home; his studies he will make you ac???quainted withal: This kindness shall supply the want of your slackness: And so heaven keep you.
Alonzo Tiveria very well,
A very ancient friend of mine, I take it,
For till this hour I never heard his Name, yet.
You look (Sir) as if ye had forgot my Father.
No, no, I look as I would remember him,
For that I never remembered, I cannot forget (Sir)
Alonzo Tiveria.
The same (Sir.)
And now in the Indies?
Yes.
He may be any where,
For ought that I consider.
Think again (Sir)
You were Students both at one time in Salamanca,
And, as I take it, Chamber-fellowes.
Ha?
Nay, sure you must remember.
Would I could.
I have heard him say, you were Gossips too.
Very likely,
You did not hear him say, to whom? for we Students
May often-times over-reach our memories,
Dost thou remember (Diego) this same Seignior?
Thou hast been mine these twenty years.
Remember?
Why this Fellow would make ye mad: Nova Hispania?
And Seignior Tiveria? what are these?
He may as well name ye Friends out of Cataya
Take heed I beseech our worship: doe you hear, (my friend?)
You have no Letters for me?
Not any Letter,
But I was charged to doe my Fathers love
To the old honest Sexton Diego; are you he (Sir?)
Ha? have I friends, and know'em not? my name is Diego,
But if either I remember you, or your Father,
Or Nova Hispania (I was never there Sir)
Or any kindred that you have ??? for heaven-sake, Master,
Let's cast about a little, and consider,
We may dream out our time.
It seems I am deceived (Sir)
Yet, that you are Don Lopes all men tell me,
The Curate here, and have bin some time (sir)
And you the Sexton Diego, such I am sent too,
The Letter tells as much: may be they are dead,
And you of the like names succeed: I thank ye gentlemen,
Ye have done honestly, in telling truth,
I might have bin forward else. For that Lopes
That was my Fathers friend, I had a charge,
(A charge of Money) to deliver (Gentlemen)
Five hundred Ducats, a poor small gratuity,
But since you are not he, good sir, let me think,
I pray ye be patient.
Pray ye stay a little,
Nay, let me remember, I beseech ye stay, Sir.
An honest noble friend, that sends so lovingly;
An old friend too; I shall remember sure, Sir.
Thou say true Diego.
'Pray ye consider quickly,
Doe, doe, by any means, me thinks already
A grave staid gentleman comes to my memory.
He's old indeed, sir.
With a goodly white Beard,
(For now he must be so: I know he must be)
Signior Alonzo, (Master.)
I begin to have him.
'Has bin from hence, about some twenty years (sir.)
Some five and twenty (sir.)
You say most true (sir)
Just to an hour; it is now just five and twenty,
A sine strait timbered man, and a brave soldier,
He married: let me see, ???
De Castro's Daughter.
The very same.
Thou art a very Rascal,
De Castro is the Turk to thee, or any thing:
The Money rubs 'em into strange remembrances,
For as many Ducats more they wou d remember Adam.
Give me your hand, you are welcome to your country,
Now I remember plainly, manifestly,
As freshly, as if yesterday I had seen him,
Most heartily welcome, sinful that I am,
Most sinful man, why should I loose this Gentleman?
This loving old Companion? we had all one soul, sir,
He dwelt here hard by, at a handsome???
Farm sir,
You say most true.
Alonzo Tiveria;
Lord, Lord, that time should play the treacherous knave thus?
Why, he was the only friend, I had in Spain (sir)
I knew your Mother too, a handsome Gentlewoman,
She was married very young: I married 'em:
I doe remember now the Masks and Sports then,
The Fireworks, and the fine delights; good faith, sir,
Now I look in your face, whose eyes are those Diego?
Nay, if he be not just Alonzo's picture???
Lord how I blush for these two impudents?
Well Gentleman, I think your name's Leandro;
It is indeed (sir)
Gra'-mercy Letter, thou had never known else.
I have dandled ye, and kissed ye and plaid with ye
A hundred, and a hundred times, and danced ye,
And swong ye in my Bell-ropes, ye loved swinging.
A sweet Boy.
Sweet lying knaves.
What would these doe for thousands?
A wondrous sweet Boy then it was, see now
Time that consumes us, shoots him up still sweeter.
How do's the noble Gentleman? how fares he?
When shall we see him? when will he bless his Country?
O, very shortly, sir, till his return,
He has sent me over to your charge.
And welcome,
Nay, you shall know you are welcome to your friend, sir,
And to my Study (sir) which must be the Law,
To further which, he would entreat your care
To plant me in the favour of some man
That's expert in that knowledge: for his pains
I have three hundred Ducats more: For my Diet,
Enough (sir) to defray me: which I am charged
To take still, as I use it, from your custody,
I have the money ready, and I am weary.
Sit down, sit down, and once more ye are most welcome,
The Law you have hit upon most happily,
Here is a Master in that Art, Bartolus,
A neighbour by, to him I will prefer ye,
A learned man, and my most loving Neighbour,
I'll doe ye faithful service (sir.)
He's an Ass,
And so we'll use him; he shall be a Lawyer.
But if ever he recover this money again: before Diego.
And get some pretty pittance: my Pupil's hungry.
Pray ye Sir, unlade me.
I'll refresh ye Sir;
When ye want, you know your Exchequer.
If all this get me but access, I am happy.
Come, I am tender of ye,
I'll go with ye,
To have this Fort betrayed these fools must fliece me.
My Amaranta, a retired sweet life,
Private and close, and still, and houswifely.
Becomes a Wife, sets off the grace of woman
At home to be believed both young, and handsome,
As Lil???ies that are casde in crystal Glasses,
Makes up the wonder: show it abroad, it is stale,
And still and the more eyes cheapen it, it is more slubberd,
And what need windows open to inviting?
Or evening Tarrasses, to take opinions?
When the most wholesome Ayre (my wife) blows inward,
When good thoughts are the noblest Companions,
And old chaste stories (wife) the best discourses;
But why doe I talk thus, that know thy nature?
You know your own disease: distrust, &amp; jealousies,
And those two, give these Lessons, not good meaning,
What trial is there of my honesty,
When I am mewed at home? to what end, Husband,
Serves all the virtuous thoughts, and chaste behaviours
Without their uses? Then they are known most excellent
When, by their contraries the are set off, and burnished,
If ye both hold me fair, and chaste, and virtuous,
Let me go fearless out, and win that greatness;
These Seeds grow not to Shades, and concealed places
Set 'em in the heat of all, then they rise glorious.
Peace, ye are too soud.
You are too covetous,
If that be ranked a virtue, you have a rich one,
Set me (like other Lawyers wives) off handsomely,
Attended as I ought, and as they have it,
My Coach, my people, and my handsome women,
My will, in honest things.
Peace Amaranta:
They have content, rich clothes, and that secures 'em,
Binds, to their careful Husbands, their observance,
They are merry, ride abroad, meet, laugh,
Thou shalt too:
And freely may converse with proper Gentlemen,
Suffer temptations daily to their honour.
You are now too far again: thou shalt have any thing,
Let me but lay up for a handsome Office,
And then my Amaranta ???
Here's a thing now,
Ye place as pleasure to me: all my retinue,
My Chamber-maid, my Kitchin-maid, my friend,
And what she fails in, I must doe my self.
A soil to set my Beauty off, I thank ye,
You will place the Devil next for a Companion,
No more such words (good wife)
What would you have (Maid?)
Master Curate, and the Sexton, &amp; a stranger (sir)
Attend to speak with your worship.
A stranger?
You had best to be jealous of the man you know not.
'Pree thee no more of that.
'Pray ye go out to 'em,
That will be safest for ye, I am well here,
I only love your peace, and serve like a slave for it.
No, no, thou shalt not; it is some honest Client,
Rich, and litigious, the Curate has brought to me,
Prithee go in (my Duck) I'll but speak to 'em,
And return instantly.
I am commanded,
One day you will know my sufferance.??? 
And reward it.
So, so, fast bind, fast find; Come in my Neighbours,
My loving Neighbours pray ye come in, ye are welcome,
Bless your good reverence.
Good-day, good Master Curate,
And neighbour Diego, welcome: what's your business?
And 'pray ye be short (good friends) the time is precious,
Welcome, good sir.
To be short then with your Mastership.
(For I know your several hours, are full of business)
We have brought ye this young-man, of honest parents,
And of an honest face.
It seems so (Neighbours)
But to what end?
To be your Pupil (Sir)
Your Servant, if you please.
I have travelled far, sir.
To seek a worthy man,
Alas, good Gentleman,
I am a poor man, and a private too,
Unfit to keep a Servant of your Reckoning;
My house a little Cottage, and scarce able
To hold my self, and those poor few live under it;
Besides, you must not blame me Gentleman,
If I were able to receive a Servant,
To be a little scrupulous of his dealing
For in these times???
'Pray let me answer that (sir)
Here is five hundred Ducats, to secure him,
He cannot want (sir) to make good his credit,
Good gold, and coin.
And thats an honest pledge;
Yet sure, that needs not, for his face, and carriage,
Seem to declare an in-bred honesty,
And for I have a ripe mind to the Law (sir)
(In which I understand you live a Master)
The least poor corner in your house, poor Bed (sir)
(Let me not seem intruding to your Worship)
With some Books to instruct me, and your Counsel,
Shall I rest most content with: other Acquaintance
Then your grave presence, and the grounds of Law
I dare not covet, nor I will not seek (sir)
For surely mine own nature desires privacy.
Next, for your monthly pains (to show my thanks,)
I doe proportion out some twenty Ducats;
As I grow riper, more: three hundred now (sir)
To show my love to learning, and my Master,
My diet, I'll defray too, without trouble.
Note but his mind to learning.
I do strangely, yes, and I like it too, thanks to his money.
Would he would live with me, and learn to dig too.
A wondrous modest man (sir.)
So it seems,
His dear love to his Study must be nourished
Neighbour, he's like to prove.
With your good counsel,
And with your diligence, as you will ply him;
His Parents, when they know your care???
Come hither;
An honester young man, your worship ne'er kept,
But he is so bashful???
O I like him better,
Say I should undertake ee, which indeed (sir)
Will be no little straightness to my living,
Considering my Affairs, and my small house (sir)
For I see some promises that pull me to ye;
Could you content your self, at first thus meanly,
To lye hard, in an out ???part of my house (sir?)
For I have not many Lodgings to allow ye;
And study should be still remote from company;
A little fire sometimes too, to refresh ye;
A Student must be frugal: sometimes Lights too,
According to your labour.
Any thing (sir)
That's dry, and wholesome: I am no bred-wanton.
Then I receive you: but I must desire ye
To keep within your confines.
Ever sir,
There's the Gold, and ever be your servant,
Take it and give me Books: may I but prove (sir)
According to my wish, and these shall multiply.
Do, study hard, pray ye take him in, and settle him,
He's only fit for you; Show him his Cell (sir.)
Take a good heart; and when ye are a cunning Lawyer,
I'll sell my Bells and you shall prove it lawful,
Come, sir, with me: neighbours I thank your diligence.
I'll come sometimes, and crack a case with ye.
Welcome ??? 
Here's money got with ease: here, spend that jovially,
And pray for the Fool, the Founder.
Many more Fools
I heartily pray may follow his example,
Lawyers, or Lubbers, or of what condition,
And many such sweet friends in Nova Hispania.
It will do well; Let 'em but send their moneys,
Come from what quarter of the world, I care not,
I'll know 'em instantly; nay I'll be a kin to 'em;
I cannot miss a man, that sends me money:
Let him Law there, long as his Ducats last, Boy,
I'll grace him, and prefer him.
I'll turn Trade (Master) and now live by the living
Let the dead stink, it is a poor stinking Trade.
If the young Fool now
Should chance to chop upon his fair Wife (Diego.)
And handle her Case (Master) that's a law point,
A point would make him start, and put on his Spectacles
A hidden point, were worth the canvassing.
Now surely, surely, I should love him (Diego)
And love him heartily: nay, I should love my self,
Or any thing that had but that good fortune,
For to say truth the Lawyer is a dog-bolt,
An arrant worm: and though I call him worshipful,
I wish him a canonised Cuckold (Diego)
Now, if my youth doe dub him???
He is too demure (sir.)
If he do sting her home.
There's no such matter,
The woman was not borne to so much blessedness,
He has no heate: study consumes his oil (Master,)
Let's leave it to the will of Fate, and presently
Over a cup of lusty Sack, let's prophecy.
I am like a man that dreamt he was an Emperor,
Come Diego, hope, &amp; whilst he lasts, we'll lay it on. 
Angelo, Milanese, did you see this wonder?
Yes, yes.
And you Arsenio?
Yes he's gon (Sir)
Strangely disguised, he's set upon his voyage.
Love guide his thoughts: he's a brave honest fellow,
Sit close Don Lawyer, ?? that arrant knave now,
How he will stink, will smoke again, will burst:
He's the most arrant Beast.
He may be more beast.
Let him bear six, and six, that all may blaze him,
The villainy he has sowed into my Brother,
And from his State the Revenue he has reached at:
Pay him, my good Leandro, take my prayers.
And all our wishes plough with his fine white heifer.
Mark him (my dear Friend) for a famous Cuckold,
Let it out-live his Books, his pains, and hear me,
The more he seeks to smother it with Justice, 
Let it blaze out the more: what news Andrea?
News I am loath to tell ye: but I am charged (Sir)
Your Brother lays a strict command upon ye,
No more to know his house, upon our danger,
I am sorry (Sir.)
Faith never be: I am glad on it,
He keeps the house of pride, and foolery:
I mean to shun it: so return my Answer,
Twill shortly spew him out; Come, let's be merry,
And lay our heads together, carefully
How we may help our friend; and let's lodge near him,
Be still at hand: I would not for my patrimony,
But he should crown his Lawyer, a learned Monster,
Come, let's away I am stark mad till I see him. 
Why, will ye bring men in, and yet be jealous?
Why will ye lodge a young man, a man able,
And yet rapine?
He shall not trouble thee (Sweet)
A modest poor slight thing, did I not tell thee
He was only given to the Book, and for that
How royally he pays? finds his own meat too.
I will not have him here: I know your courses,
And what fits you will fall into of madness.
Y'faith, I will not Wife,
I will not try ye,
He comes not near thee: shall not dare to tread
Within thy Lodgings, in an old out-Roome
Where Logs, and Coals were laid.
Now ye lay fire; Fire to consume your quiet.
Did thou know him,
Thou would think as I doe: he disquiet thee?
Thou may wear him next thy heart, &amp; yet not warm him,
His mind (poor man) 's of the Law, how to live after,
And not on lewdness: on my conscience
He knows not how to look upon a woman
More then by reading what Sex she is.
I doe not like it (Sir.)
Dost thou not see (Fool)
What presents he sends hourly in his gratefulness?
What delicate meates?
You had best trust him at your Table,
Doe and repent it doe.
If thou be willing,
By my troth, I think he might come, he's so modest,
He never speaks: there's part of that he gave me,
He'll eat but half a dozen bits, and rise immediately,
Even as he eats, he studies: he'll not disquiet thee,
Doe as thou please (Wife.)
What means this Wood-cocke? 
Retire (Sweet) there's one knocks: come in, your business.
My Lord Don Henrique, would entreat ye, Sir,
To come immediately, and speak with him,
He has business of some moment.
I'll attend him,
I must be gon: I prithee think the best (wife)
At my return I'll tell thee more, good morrow;
Sir, keep ye close, and study hard: an hour hence
I'll read a new Case to ye:??? 
I'll be ready. 
So many hundred Ducats, to lie scurvily?
And learn the pelting law? this sounds but slenderly,
But very poorly: I would see this fellow
Very fine see him, how he looks: I will find
To what end, and what study: there's the place:
I'll go of the other side, and take my Fortune;
I think there is a window. 
He's gone out
Now, if I could but see her: she is not this way:
How nastily he keeps his house? my Chamber,
If I continue long, will choke me up,
It is so damp: I shall be mortifide
For any woman, if I stay a month here:
I'll in, and strike my Lute, that sound may call her. 
He keeps very close: Lord, how I long to see him:
A Lute struck handsomely, a voice too; I'll hear that:
These Verses are no Law, they sound too sweetly,
Now I am more desirous. 
It is she certain.
What's that that peeps?
O, admirable face!
Sure it is the man.
I will go out a little.
Hee looks not like a fool, his face is noble:
How still he stands?
I am stricken dumb, with wonder,
Sure all the Excellence of Earth dwells here.
How pale he looks? yet how his eyes like torches,
Fling their beams round: how manly his face shows?
He comes on: surely he will speak: he is made most handsomely:
This is no Clerk behaviour; Now I have seen ye,
I'll take my time: husba??d ye have brought home tinder. 
Sure she has transformed me,
I had forgot my tongue clean,
I never saw a face yet, but this rare one,
But I was able boldly to encounter it,
And speak my mind, my lips were lock upon me,
This is divine, and only served with reverence;
O most fair cover, of a hand far fairer,
Thou blessed Innocence, that gaurds that whiteness,
Live next my heart. I am glad I have got a relic, 
A relic when I pray to it, may work wonders.
Hark, there s some noise: I must retire again.
This blessed Apparition, makes me happy;
I'll suffer, and I'll sacrifice my substance.
But I'll enjoy: now softly to my Kennel. 
You know my cause sufficiently?
I doe (Sir.)
And though it will impair my honesty,
And strike deep at my Credit, yet (my Bartolus)
There being no other evasion left to free me
From the vexation of my spiteful Brother,
That most insultingly reigns over me,
I must and will go forward.
Doe (my Lord)
And look not after credit, we shall cure that,
Your bended honesty, we shall set right (Sir)
We Surgeons of the Law, doe desperate cures (Sir)
And you shall see how heartily I'll handle it:
Mark how I'll knock it home: be of good cheer (Sir)
You give good Fees, and those beget good Causes,
The prerogative of your crowns will carry the matter,
(Carry it sheer) The Assistant fits to morrow,
And he's your friend, your monied men love naturally,
And as your loves are clear, so are your Causes.
He shall not want for that.
No, no, he must not,
Line your Cause warmly (Sir) the times are Aguish,
That holds a Plea in heart; hang the penurious,
Their Causes (like their purses) have poor Issues.
That way, I was ever bountiful.
It is true (Sir)
That makes ye feared forces the Snakes to kneel to ye,
Live full of money, and supply the Lawyer,
And take your choice of what mans lands you please (Sir)
What pleasures, or what profits; what revenges,
They are all your own: I must have witnesses
Enough, and ready.
You shall not want (my Bartolus.)
Substantial fearless souls, that will swear suddenly,
That will swear any thing.
They shall swear truth too.
That's no great matter: for variety
They may swear truth, else it is not much looked after:
I will serve Process, presently, and strongly
Upon your Brother, and Octavio,
Jacintha and the Boy; provide your proofs (Sir)
And set 'em fairly off, be sure of Witnesses,
Though they cost money, want no store of witnesses,
I have seen a handsome Cause, so foully lost (Sir,)
So beastly cast away for want of Witnesses.
There shall want nothing.
Then be gone, be provident,
Send to the Judge, a secret way: you have me,
And let him understand the heart.
I shall (Sir.)
And feel the pulses strongly beat, I'll study,
And at my hour, but mark me, go, be happy,
Go and believe in the Law.
I hope twill help me. 
Ne'er talk to me, I will not stay amongst ye,
Debauched and ignorant lazy knaves I found ye,
And fools I leave ye, I have taught these twenty years,
Preached spoon-meat to ye, that a child might swallow,
Yet ye are Block-heads still: what should I say to ye?
Ye have neither faith, nor money left to save ye,
Am I a fit companion for such Beggars?
If the Shepherd will suffer the sheep to be scabbed (sir)
No, no, ye are rotten.
Would they were, for my sake.
I have nointed ye, and tar'd ye with my doctrine,
And yet the murren sticks to ye, yet ye are mangy,
I will avoid ye. 
Pray ye (Sir) be not angry,
In the pride of your new Cassock, doe not part with us,
We doe acknowledge ye a careful Curate,
And one that seldom troubles us with Sermons,
A short slice of a Reading serves us (Sir)
We doe acknowledge ye a quiet Teacher,
Before You'll vex your Audience, you'll sleep with 'em,
And that's a loving thing.
We grant ye (Sir)
The only benefactor to our Rolling,
To all our merry Sports, the first provoker,
And at our Feasts we know there is no reason,
But you that edify us most, should eat most.
I will not stay for all this, ye shall know me
A man borne to a more beseeming fortune
Then ringing all-in, to a rout of Dunces.
We will increase your Tithes, you shall have Eggs too,
Though they may prove most dangerous to our Issues.
I am a Smith; yet thus far out of my love
You shall have the tenth horse I prick, to pray for,
I am sure I prick five hundred in a year (Sir.
I am a Cooke a man of a dried conscience,
Yet thus far I relent: you shall have with porrage.
Your stipend shall be raised too (good neighbour Diego.
Would ye have me speak for ye? I am more angry
Ten times more vexed not to be pacified:
No there be other places for poor Sextons
Places of profit (Friends) fine stirring places,
And people that know how to use our Offices,
Know what they were made for: I speak for such Capons?
Ye shall find the Key of the Church,
Under the door (Neighbours,)
You may go in, and drive away the daws.
My Surplice, with one sleeve, you shall find there,
For to that dearth of Linen, you have driven me;
And the old Cutworke Cope, that hangs by gymitrie:
Pray ye turn em carefully, they are very tender:
The remnant of the Books, lie where they did (Neighbours)
Half puffed away with the Church-wardens pipings.
Such smoky zeals they have against hard places,
The poore-mans Box is there too: if ye find any thing
Beside the posy, and that half rubbed out too,
For fear it should awake too much charity
Give it to pious uses, that is, spend it:
The Bell-ropes, they are strong enough to hang ye,
So we bequeath ye to your destiny.
'Pray ye be not so hasty.
I'll speak a proud word to ye,
Would ye have us stay?
We doe most hearilty pray ye.
I'll draw as mighty drink (Sir.)
A strong motive,
The stronger still the more ye come unto me.
And I'll send for my Daughter:
This may stir too:
The Maiden is of age, and must be edified.
You shall have any thing: loose our learned Vicar?
And our most constant friend; honest dear Diego?
Yet all this will not do: I'll tell ye (Neighbours)
And tell ye true: if ye will have us stay,
If you will have the comforts of our companies,
You shall be bound to doe us right in these points,
You shall be bound, and this the obligation,
Die when it is fit, that we may have fit duties,
And doe not seek to draw???out our undoings,
Marry tried women, that are free, and fruitful,
Get children in abundance, for your Christnings,
Or suffer to be got, it is equal justice,
Let Weddings, Christnings, Churchings, Funerals,
And merry Gossippings go round, go round still,
Round as a Pig, that we may find the profit.
And let your old men fall sick handsomely:
And die immediately, their Sons may shoot up:
Let women die of the sullens too, it is natural,
But be sure their Daughters be of age first,
That they may stock us still: your queasy young wives
That perish undelivered, I am vexed with,
And vexed abundantly, it much concerns me,
There's a childes burial lost, look that be mended.
Let 'em be brought to bed, then die when they please,
These things considered (Country-men) and sworn to
All these, and all our sports again, and gambols.
We must die, and we must live, and we'll be merry,
Every man shall be rich by one another.
We are here to morrow, and gone to day: for my part
If getting children can be-friend my Neighbours,
I'll labour hard but I will fill your Font (Sir.)
I have a Mother now, and an old Father,
They are as sure your own, within these two months???
My Sister must be prayed for too, she is desperate,
Desperate in love.
Keep, desperate men far from her,
Then twill go hard: doe you see how melancholy?
Doe you mark the man? do you profess ye love him?
And would doe any thing to stay his fury?
And are ye unprovided to refresh him,
To make him know your loves? fie Neighbours,
We'll doe any thing,
We have brought Music to appease his spirit,
And the best Song we'll give him.
Pray ye sit down (Sir)
They know their duties now, and they stand ready
To tender their best mirth.
It is well, proceed Neighbours,
I am glad I have brought ye to understand good manners,
Ye had Puritan hearts awhile, spurned at all pastimes,
But I see some hope now.
We are set proceed Neighbours.
What ails this Priest? how highly the thing takes it?
Lord how it looks? has he not bought some Prebend?
Leandro's money, makes the Rascal merry,
Merry at heart; he spies us.
Be gon Neighbours, 
Here are some Gentlemen: be gone good Neighbours,
Be gon, and labour to redeem my favour,
No more words but be gon: these two are Gentlemen,
No company for crusty-handed fellows.
We will stay for a year or two, and try ye:
Fill all your hearts with joy, we will stay with ye,
Be gone no more; I take your pastimes graciously:
Would ye with me (My friends?)
We would look upon ye,
For me-thinks ye look lovely.
Ye have no Letters?
Nor any kind Remembrances?
Remembrances?
From Nova Hispania, or some part remote (Sir)
You look like travelled men: may be some old friends
That happily I have forgot; some Signeours
In China, or Cataya; some Companions???
In the Moguls Court, or else-where.
They are mad sure.
Ye came not from Peru? doe they look (Diego)
As if they had some mystery about 'em?
Another Don Alonzo now?
I marry,
And so much money, Sir, from one you know not,
Let it be who it will.
They have gracious favours.
Would ye be private?
There's no need on it (Sir)
We come to bring ye a Remembrance from a Merchant.
It is very well, it is like I know him.
No. sir,
I doe not think ye doe.
A new mistake (Diego)
Let's carry it decently.
We come to tell ye,
You have received great sums from a young Factor
They call Leandro, that has robed his Master,
Robed him, and run away.
Let's keep close (Master)
This news comes from a cold Country.
By my faith it freezes,
Is not this true? doe you shrink now (good man Curate)
Doe I not touch ye?
We have a hundred Ducats
Yet left, we doe beseech ye sir???
You'll hang both.
One may suffice.
I will not hang alone (Master)
I had the least part, you shall hang the highest.
Plague of this Tiveria, and the Letter,
The devil sent it post, to pepper us,
From Nova Hispania we shall hang at home now.
I see ye are penitent, and I have compassion:
Ye are secure both; doe but what we charge ye,
Ye shall have more gold too, and he shall give it,
Yet ne'er endanger ye.
Command us (Master)
Command us presently, and see how nimbly ???
And if we doe not handsomely endeavour ???
Go home and till ye hear more keep private,
Till we appear again, no words, (Vicar)
There's something added.
For you too.
We are ready.
Go, and expect us hourly, if ye falter,
Though ye had twenty lives???
We are fit to loose 'em.
It is most expedient that we should hang both.
If we be hanged, we cannot blame our fortune.
Farewell, and be your own friends.
We expect ye. ??? 
We cited to the Court! 
It is my wonder,
But not our fear, (Iacintha) wealthy men
That have Estates to loose, whose conscious thoughts
Are full of inward guilt, may shake with horror,
To have their Actions sifted or appear
Before the Judge. But we that know our selves
As innocent, as poor, that have no Fleece
On which the Talons of the griping Law
Can take sure hold, may smile with scorn on all
That can be urged against us.
I am confident
There is no man so covetous, that desires
To ravish our wants from us, and less hope
There can be so much Justice left on earth,
(Though sud and called upon) to ease us of
The burden of our wrongs.
What thinks Ascanio?
Should we be called in question or accused
Unjustly, what would you doe to redeem us,
From tyrannous oppression?
I could pray
To him that ever has an open ear
To hear the innocent, and right their wrongs;
Nay, by my troth, I think I could out plead
An Advocate, and sweat as much as he
Do's for a double Fee, ere you should suffer
In an honest cause.
Happy simplicity!
My dearest, and my best one: Don Iamie,
And the Advocate, that cause us to be summoned.
My Lord is moved, I see it in his looks,
And that man, in the Gown, in my opinion
Looks like a proaguing knave.
Peace, give them leave.
Serve me with Process?
My Lord, you are not lawless.
Nor thou honest;
One, that not long since was the buckram Scribe,
That would run on men's errands for an Asp???,
And from such baseness, having raised a Stock
To bribe the covetous Judge, called to the Bar,
So poor in practise too, that you would plead
A needy Clients Cause, for a starved hen,
Or half a little loin of Veale, though fly blown,
And these, the greatest Fees you could arrive at
For just proceedings; but since you turned Rascal ???
Good words, my Lord.
And grew my Brothers Bawd
In all his vicious courses, soothing him
In his dishonest practises, you are grown
The rich, and eminent knave, in the devils name,
What am I cited for?
You shall know anon,
And then too late repent this bitter language,
Or I'll miss of my ends.
Were it not in Court,
I would beat that fat of thine, raised by the food
Snatched from poor Clients mouths, into a jelly:
I would (my man of Law) but I am patient,
And would obey the Judge.
It is your best course:
Would every enemy I have would beat me,
I would wish no better Action.
'Save your Lordship.
My numble service.
My good Boy, how dost thou?
Why art thou called into the Court?
I know not,
But it is my Lord the Assistants pleasure
I should attend here.
He will soon resolve us.
Make way there for the Judge.
How? my kind Brother?
Nay then it is rank: there is some villainy towards.
It is Sessions purchased at our suit, Don Henrique,
Hath brought us hither, to hear and determine
Of what you can prefer.
I doe beseech
The honourable Court, I may be heard
In my Advocate.
It is granted.
humh, humh.
That preface
If left out in a Lawyer, spoils the Cause,
Though ne'er so good, and honest.
If I stood here,
To plead in the defence of an ill man,
(Most equal Judge) or to accuse the innocent
(To both which, I profess my self a stranger)
It would be requisite I should deck my Language
With Tropes and Figures, and all flourishes
That grace a Rethorician, it is confessed
Adulterate Metals, need the Gold-smiths Art,
To set 'em off; what, in it self is perfect
Contemns a borrowed gloss: This Lord (my Client)
Whose honest cause, when it is related truly,
Will challenge Justice, finding in his conscience
A tender scruple of a fault long since
By him committed, thinks it not sufficient
To be absolved of't, by his Confessor,
If that in open Court, he publish nor
What was so long concealed.
To what tends this?
In his young years (it is no miracle
That youth, and heat of Blood, should mix together)
He looked upon this woman, on whose face
The ruins yet remain of excellent form,
He looked on her, and loved her.
You good Angels,
What an impudence is this?
And used all means
Of Service, Courtship, Presents, that might win her
To be at his devotion: but in vain
Her maiden Fort impregnable held out
Until he promised Marriage; and before
These Witnesses a solemn Contract passed
To take her as his wife.
Give them their oath.
They are incompetent Witnesses, his own Creatures,
And will swear any thing for half a royal.
Silence.
Proceed.
Upon this strong assurance
He did enjoy his wishes to the full,
Which satisfied and then with eyes of Judgement
(Had winck'd with lust before) considering duly
The inequality of the Match, he being
Nobly descended, and allied, but she
Without a name, or Family, secretly
He purchased a Divorce, to disanull
His former Contract, marrying openly
The Lady Violante.
As you sit here
The Deputy of the great King, who is
The Substitute of that impartial Judge
With whom, or Wealth, or titles prevail nothing,
Grant to a much wronged Widow, or a Wife
Your patience, with liberty to speak
In her own Cause, and let me face to face
To this bad man, deliver what he is:
And if my wrongs, with his ingratitude balanced,
Move not compassion, let me die unpitied;
His tears, his oaths, his perjuries, I pass o'er
To think of them is a disease; but death
Should I repeat them. I dare not deny,
(For Innocence cannot justify what's false)
But all the Advocate hath alleged concerning
His falsehood and my shame in my consent,
To be most true: But now I turn to thee,
To thee Don Henrique, and if impious Acts
Have left thee blood enough to make a blush,
I'll paint it on thy cheeks. Was not the wrong
Sufficient to defeat me of mine honour,
To leave me full of sorrow, as of want,
The witness of thy lust, left in my womb,
To testify thy falsehood, and my shame?
But now so many years I had concealed
Thy most inhumane wickedness, and won
This Gentleman, to hide it from the world
To Father what was thine (for yet by heaven,
Though in the City, he pas'd for my husband,
He never knew me as his wife)
It is strange:
Give him an Oath.
I gladly swear, and truly.
After all this (I say) when I had borne
These wrongs, with Saint-like patience saw another
Freely enjoy, what was (in Justice) mine,
Yet still so tender of thy rest, and quiet,
I never would divulge it, to disturb
Thy peace at home, yet thou most barbarous,
To be so careless of me, and my Fame,
(For all respect of thine in the first step
To thy base lust, was lost) in open Court 
To publish my disgrace? and on record,
To write me up an easie-yeilding wanton?
I think can find no president: In my extremes,
One comfort yet is left, that though the Law
Divorce me from thy bed, and made free way
To the unjust embraces of an other,
It cannot yet deny that this thy Son
(Look up Ascanio since it is come out)
Is thy legitimate heir.
Confederacy:
A trick (my Lord) to cheat me; ever you give
Your Sentence grant me hearing.
New Chimera's?
I am (my Lord) since he is without Issue,
Or hope of any his undoubted Heir,
And this forged by the Advocate, to defeat me
Of what the Laws of Spain, confer upon me,
A mere Imposture, and conspiracy
Against my future fortunes,
You are too bold.
Speak to the Cause Don Henrique.
I confess,
(Though the acknowledgement must wound mine honour,
That all the Court hath heard touching this Cause,
Or with me, or against me) is most true:
The later part my Brother urged, excepted:
For what I now doe, is not out of Spleen
(As he pretends) but from remorse of conscience)
And to repair the wrong that I have done
To this poor woman: And I beseech your Lordship
To think I have not so far lost my reason,
To bring into my Family, to succeed me,
The stranger???Issue of another Bed,
By proof, this is my Son, I challenge him,
Accept him, and acknowledge him, and desire
By a definitive Sentence of the Court,
He may be so recorded, and full power
To me, to take him home.
A second rape
To the poor remnant of Content, that's left me,
If this be granted: and all my former wrongs
Were but beginnings to my miseries,
But this the height of all: rather then part
With my Ascanio, I'll deny my oath,
Profess my self a Strumpet, and endure
What punishment so ever the Court decrees
Against a wretch that hath forsworn her self,
Or played the impudent whore.
This tastes of passion,
And that must not divert the course of Justice;
Don Henrique, take your Son, with this Condition
You give him maintenance, as becomes his birth,
And twill stand with your honour to doe something
For this wronged woman: I will compel nothing,
But leave it to your will. Break up the Court:
It is in vain to move me; my doom's passed,
And cannot be revoked. ??? 
There's your reward.
More Causes: and such Fees. Now to my Wife,
I have too long bin absent: Health to your Lordship,
You all look strangely, and I fear believe
This unexpected fortune makes me proud,
Indeed it do's not: I shall ever pay you
The duty of a son, and honour you
Next to my Father: good my Lord, for yet
I dare not call you uncle, be not sad,
I never shall forget those noble favours
You did me being a stranger, and if ever
I live to be the master of a fortune,
You shall command it.
Since it was determi'nd
I should be cozened, I am glad the profit
Shall fall on thee, I am too tough to melt,
But something I will do.
Pray you take leave
Of your steward (gentle Brother) the good husband
That takes up all for you.
Very well, mock on,
It is your turn: I may have mine??? 
But do not
Forget us dear Ascanio
Do not fear it.
I Every day will see you: every hour
Remember you in my prayers.
My grief's too great
To be expressed in words??? 
Take that and leave us,
Leave us without reply, nay come back sirrah
And study to forget such things as these
As are not worth the knowledge.
O good Sir.
These are bad principles???
Such as you must learn
Now you are mine for wealth and poverty
Can hold no friendship: and what is my will
You must observe and do, though good or ill. 
Where is my wife? before heaven, I have done wonders
Done mighty things to day, my Amaranta,
My heart rejoices at my wealthy Gleanings,
A rich litigious Lord I love to follow,
A Lord that builds his happiness on brawlings,
O it is a blessed thing to have rich Clients,
Why, wife I say, how fares my studious Pupil?
Hard at it still? ye are too violent
All things must have their rests they will not last else
Come out and breathe. 
I do beseech you pardon me
I am deeply in a sweet point Sir,
I'll instruct ye:
I say take breath, seek health first, then your study,
O my sweet soul I have brought thee golden birds home,
Birds in abundance: I have done strange wonders:
There's more a hatching too.
Have ye done good husband?
Then it is a good day spent
Good enough chicken,
I have spread the nets of the law, to catch rich booties,
And they come flttering in: how do's my Pupil?
My modest thing, hast thou yet spoken to him?
As I past by his chamber I might see him,
But he is so bookish,
And so bashful too,
I faith he is, before he will speak, he will starve there
I pity him a little.
So do I too.
And if he please to take the air of the gardens
Or walk in the inward rooms, so he molest not???
He shall not trouble thee, he dare not speak to thee
Bring out the Chesse-board ???come let's have a game wife,
I'll try your mastery, you say you are cunning
As learned as ye are (Sir) I shall beat ye
Here he steals out, put him not out of countenance
Prithee look another way, he will be gone else
Walk and refresh your self I'll be with you presently,
I'll take the air a little.
Twill be healthful.
Will ye be there? then here? Isle spare ye that man,
'Would I were so near too, and a mate fitting.
What think ye (Sir) to this? have at your Knight now
It was subtly played: your Queen lies at my service
Pre thee look off, he is ready to pop in again,
Look off I say, dost thou not see how he blushes?
I do not blast him:
But ye do, and burn too.
What killing looks she steals?
I have you now close,
Now for a Mate.
You are a blessed man that may so have her.
Oh that I might play with her??? 
Who's there? I come you cannot scope me now wife
I come, I come, 
Most blessed hand that calls him.
Play quickly wife.
'Pray ye give leave to think, Sir,
An honest neighbour that dwells hard by (Sir)
Would fain speak with your worship about business.
The devil blow him off.
Play.
I will study:
For if you beat me thus, you will still laugh at me??? 
He knocks again; I cannot stay. Leandro
'Pray thee come near.
I am well (Sir) here,
Come hither:
Be not afraid but come.
Here's none will bite (Sir)
God forbid Lady.
'Pray come nearer.
Yes forsooth.
'Pre thee observe these men: just as they stand here
And see this Lady, do not alter 'em,
And be not partial, Pupil.
No indeed Sir.
Let her not move a pawn, I'll come back presently
Nay you shall know I am a Conqueror.
Have an eye Pupil??? 
Can ye play at Chess Sir?
A little Lady.
But you cannot tell me
How to avoid this Mate, &amp; win the Game too
He's noble eyes: ye dare not friend me so far.
I dare do any thing that's in mans power, Lady,
To be a friend to such a noble beauty.
This is no Lawyers language: I pray ye tell me,
Whether may I remove, Ye see I am set round?
To avoid my husband.
I shall tell ye happily.
But happily you will not be instructed.
Yes, and I thank ye too, shall I move this man?
Those are unseemly: move one can serve ye
Can honour ye, can love ye.
'Pray ye tell quickly
He will return and then
I'll tell ye instantly
Move me, and I will move any way to serve ye
Move your heart this way (Lady)
How?
'Pray ye hear me.
Behold the sport of Love, when he is imperious
Behold the slave of Love
Move my Queen this way?
Sure, he's some worthy man: then if he hedge me
Or here to open him.
Do but behold me
If there be pity in you, do but view me,
But view the misery I have undertaken
For you the poverty.
He will come presently.
Now play your best Sir, though I loose this Rook here
Yet I get Liberty.
I'll seize your fair hand
And warm it with a hundred, hundred kisses
The God of love warm your desires but equal
That shall play my game now.
What do you mean Sir?
Why do you stop me?
That ye may intend me.
The time he's blessed us both: Love bids us use it.
I am a Gentleman nobly descended:
Young to invite your Love, rich to maintain it.
I bring a whole heart to ye, thus I give it,
And to those burning altars thus I offer,
And thus divine lips, where perpetual Sping grows.
Take that, ye are too saucy.
How proud Lady?
Strike my deserts?
I was too blame.
What wise, there?
Heaven keep my house from thieves.
I am wretched:
Opened, discovered, lost to my wishes.
I shall be hooted at.
What noise was this (wife?)
Why dost thou smile?
This proud thing will betray me.
Why these lie here? what anger (dear?)
Why none, Sir,
Only a chance, your pupil said he plaid well,
And so indeed he do's: he undertook for ye
Because I would not sit so long time idle
I made my Liberty avoided your mate,
And he again as cunningly endangered me,
Indeed he put me strangely to it. When presently
Hearing you come, and having broke his ambush too
Having the second time brought off my Queen fair,
I rose of the sudden smilingly to show ye,
My apron caught the Chesse-board, and the men,
And there the noise was.
Thou art grown a Master,
For all this, I shall beat ye.
Or I, Lawyer,
For now I love her more, it was a neat answer,
And by it hangs a mighty hope, I thank her
She gave my pate a sound knock that it rings yet,
But you shall have a sounder if I live Lawyer,
My heart aches yet I would not be in that fear???
I am glad ye are a gamester, Sir, sometimes
For recreation we two shall fight hard at it.
He will prove too hard for me,
I hope he shall do,
But your Ches-board is too hard for my head, line that good Lady,
I have been atoning two most wrangling neighbours,
They had no money, therefore I made even
Come, let's go in, and eat, truly I am hungry.
I have eaten already, I must entreat your pardon
Do as ye please, we shall expect ye at supper.
He he's got a little heart, now it seems handsomely,
You'll get no little head, if I do not look to ye.
If ever I do catch thee again thou vanity???
I was too blame to be so rash, I am sorry??? 
Hear but my reasons,
O my patience hear 'em.
Can cunning falsehood colour an excuse?
With any seeming shape of borrowed truth?
Extenuate this woeful wrong, not error.
You gave consent that to defeat my brother
I should take any course,
But not to make
The cure more loathsome then the foul disease:
Was it not enough you took me to your bed,
Tired with loose dalliance, and with empty veins,
All those abilities spent before and wasted,
That could confer the name of mother on me?
But that (to perfect my account of sorrow)
For my long barrenness you must heighten it
By showing to my face, that you were fruitful
Hugged in the base embraces of another?
If Solitude that dwelt beneath my roof,
And want of children was a torment to me
What end of my vexation to behold
A bastard to upbraid me with my wants?
And hear the name of father paid to ye
Yet know my self no mother,
What can I say?
shall I confess my fault and ask your pardon?
Will that content ye?
If it could make void,
What is confirmed in Court No, no, Don Henrique
You shall know that I find my self abused,
And add to that I have a women's anger,
And while I look upon this Basilic
Whose envious eyes hath blasted all my comforts
Rest confident I'll study my dark ends,
And not your pleasures,
Noble Lady, hear me,
Not as my Fathers son, but as your servant,
Vouchsafe to hear me, for such in my duty,
I ever will appear: And far be it from
My poor ambition, ever to look on you,
But with that reverence; which a slave stands bound
To pay a worthy Mistress: I have heard
That Dames of highest place, nay Queens themselves,
Disdain not to be served by such as are
Of meanest Birth: and I shall be most happy,
To be employed when you please to command me
Even in the coursest Office, as your Page,
I can wait on your trencher:: fill your wine
Carry your pontafles, and be sometimes blessed
In all humility to touch your feet
Or if that you esteem that too much grace
I can run by your Coach: observe your looks
And hope to gain a fortune by my service,
With your good favour, which now, as a Son,
I dare not challenge
As a Son,
Forgive me
I will forget the name, let it be death
For me to call you Mother.
Still upbraided?
No way left to appease you?
None: now hear me,
Hear what I vow before the face of heaven,
And if I break it all plagues in this life,
And those that after death are feared, fall on me,
While that this Bastard stays under my roof,
Look for no peace at home, for I renounce
All Offices of a wife,
What am I fallen to?
I will not eat, nor sleep with you and those hours
Which I should spend in prayers for your health
Shall be employed in Curses,
Terrible.
All the day long, i'll be as tedious to you
As lingering fevers, and i'll watch the nights,
To ring alon'd your shame and break your sleeps
Or if you doe but slumber, i'll appear
In the shape of all my wrongs, and like a fury
Fright you to madness, and if all this fail
To work out my revenge, I have friends and kinsmen,
That will not sit down tame with the disgrace
That's offered to our noble family
In what I suffer,
How am I divided
Between the duties I owe as a Husband,
And piety of a Parent?
I am taught Sir
By the instinct of nature that obedience
Which bids me to prefer your peace of mind,
Before those pleasures that are dearest to me
Be wholly hers (my Lord) I quit all parts,
That I may challenge: may you grow old together
And no distaste ever find you and before
The Characters of age are printed on you
May you see many Images of your selves,
Though I, like some false Glass, that's never looked in
Am cast a side, and broken from this hour
(Unless invited, which I dare not hope for)
I never will set my forbidden feet,
Over your threshold: only give me leave
Though cast off to the world, to mention you,
In my devotions it is all I sue for
And so I take my last leave
Though I am
Devoted to a wife nay almost sol'd
A slave to serve her pleasures, yet I cannot
So part with all humanity, but I must
Show something of a Father: thou shalt not go
Unfurnished and unfriended too: take that
To guard thee from necessities; may thy goodness
Meet many favours, and thine innocence
Deserve to be the heir of greater fortunes,
Then thou were it borne to. Scorn me not Violante
This banishment is a kind of civil death,
And now, as it were at his Funeral
To shed a tear or two, is not unmanly
And so farewell for ever: one word more,
Though I must never see thee (my Ascanio)
When this is spent (for so the Judge decreed)
Send to me for supply: are you pleased now?
Yes: I have cause: to see you howl and blubber
At the parting of my torment, &amp; your shame 
It is well: proceed: supply his wants: doe doe:
Let the great dowre I brought serve to maintain
Your Bastards riots: send my Clothes and Jewels,
To your old acquaintance, your dear dame his Mother
Now you begin to melt, I know twill follow,
Is all I doe misconstrude?
I will take
A course to right my self a speeding one:
By the blessed Saints, I will; if I prove cruel
The shame to see thy foolish pity taught me
To loose my natural softness, keep off from me
Thy flateries are infectious, and i'll fl thee
As I would doe a Leper.
Let not fury
Transport you so: you know I am your Creature,
All love, but to your self, with him, hath left me
I'll join with you in any thing
In vain
I'll take mine own ways, and will have no partners,
I will not cross you,
Doe not, they shall find
That to a Woman of her hopes beguiled
A viper trod on, or an Aspick's, mild. 
Sits the game there? I have you by mine order,
I love Leandro for it
But you must show it
In lending him your help, to gain him means
And opportunity.
He shall want nothing,
I know my Advocate to a hair, and what
Will fetch him from his prayers, if he use any,
I am honeyed with the project: I would have him horned
For a most precious Beast.
But you loose time;
I am gon, instruct you Diego, you will find him
A sharpe and subtle knave, give him but hints
And he will amplify: Se all things ready
I'll fetch him with a vengeance.??? 
If he fail now,
We'll give him over too,
Tush he is fleshed,
And knows what vain to strike for his own credit.
All things are ready.
Then we shall have a merry Scene, no're fear it.
Is thy Master gone out?
Even now, the Curate fetched him,
About a serious business as it seemed,
For he snatched up his Cloak, and brushed his hat strait,
Set his Band handsomely, and out he galloped.
It is well, it is very well, he went out (Egla.)
As luckily, as one would say, go Husband,
He was called by providence: fling this short paper
Into Leandro's Cell, and waken him,
He is monstrous vexed, and musty, at my Chesse-play;
But this shall supple him, when he has read it:
Take your own recreation for two hours,
And hinder nothing.
If I doe, I'll hang for it. 
If that you loved Ascanio for himself,
And not your private ends, you rather should
Bless the fair opportunity, that restores him
To his Birth-right, and the Honours he was borne to,
Then grieve at his good Fortune.
Grieve Octavio?
I would resign my Essence, that he were
As happy as my love could fashion him,
Though every blessing that should fall on him,
Might prove a curse to me, my sorrow springs
Out of my fear, and doubt he is not safe.
I am acquainted with Don Henrique's nature,
And I have heard too much the fiery temper
Of Madam Violante: can you think
That she, that almost is at war with heaven
For being barren, will with equal eyes
Behold a Son of mine?
His Fathers care,
That for the want of Issue took him home,
(Though with the forfeiture of his own fame)
Will look unto his safety.
Step-mothers
Have many eyes, to find a way to mischief,
Though blind to goodness.
Here comes Don Jamie,
And with him our Ascanio.
Good youth leave me,
I know thou art forbid my company,
And only to be seen with me, will call on
Thy Fathers anger.
Sir if that to serve you
Could loose me any thing (as indeed it cannot)
I still would follow you. Alas I was borne
To doe you hurt but not to help my self,
I was, for some particular end, took home,
But am cast off again.
Is it possible?
The Lady, whom my Father calls his wife
Abhors my sight, is sick of me, and forced him
To turn me out of doors.
By my best hopes
I thank her cruelty, for it comes near
A saving charity.
I am only happy
That yet I can relieve you, 'pray you share:
My Father's wondrous kind, and promises
That I should be supplied: but sure the Lady
Is a malicious woman, and I fear
Means me no good.
I am turned a stone with wonder,
And know not what to think.
From my Lady,
Your private ear and this???
New Miracles?
She says, if you dare make your self a Fortune,
She will propose the means; My Lord Don Henrique
Is now from home and she alone expects you,
If you dare trust her so, if not despair of
A second offer, 
Though there were an Ambush
Laid for my life, I,ll on and sound this secret,
Retire thee (my Ascanio) with thy Mother:
But stir not forth, some great designe's on foot,
Fall what can fall, if ever the Sun be set,
I see you not, give me dead.
We will expect you,
And those blessed Angels, that love goodness, guard you.
Is it possible he should be rich?
Most possible,
He hath bin long, though he had but little gettings,
Drawing together, Sir.
Accounted a poor Sexton,
Honest poor Diego,
I assure ye, a close Fellow,
Both close, and scraping, and that fills the bags, Sir,
A notable good Fellow too?
Sometimes, Sir, 
When he hoped to drink a man into a surfeit,
That he might gain by his Grave.
So many thousands?
Heaven knows what.
It is strange,
Tic very strange; but we see by endeavour,
And honest labour???
Milo by continuance
Grew from a silly Calfe (with your worships reverence)
To carry a Bull, from a penny, to a pound, Sir,
And from a pound, to many: it is the progress.
Ye say true, but he loved to feed well also,
And that me-thinks???
From another mans Trencher, Sir,
And there he found it seasoned with small charge:
There he would play the Tyrant, and would devour ye
More then the Graves he made, at home he lived
Like a Chameleon sucked the air of misery, 
And grew fat by th'Brewis of an Eg-shel,
Would smell a Cooks shop, and go home and surfeit,
And be a month in fasting out that Fever.
These are good Symptoms: do's he lye so sick say ye?
Oh, very sick.
And chosen me Executor?
Only your Worship.
No hope of his amendment?
None, that we find.
He hath no kinsmen neither?
Truth, very few.
His mind will be the quieter,
What Doctors has he?
There's none sir he believes in.
They are but needless things, in such extremities.
Who draws the good-man's will?
Marry that doe I, Sir.
And to my grief.
Grief will doe little now, Sir,
Draw it to your comfort, Friend, and as I counsel ye,
An honest man, but such men live not always
Who are about him?
Many now he is passing,
That would pretend to his love, yes, and some gentlemen
That would fine counsel him, and be of his kindred;
Rich men can want no heirs, Sir.
They doe ill,
Indeed they doe, to trouble him: very ill, Sir,
But we shall take a care.
Will ye come near, Sir,
'Pray ye bring him out; Now ye may see in what state:
Give him fresh ayre. 
I am sorry, Neighbour Diego,
To find ye in so weak a state.
Ye are welcome,
But I am fleeting, Sir.
Me-thinkes he looks well,
His colour fresh, and strong, his eyes are cheerful.
A glimmering before death, it is nothing else Sir,
Do you see how he fumbles with the sheet? do ye note that
My learned Sir 'pray ye sit: I am bold to send for ye,
To take a care of what I leave.
Doe you hear that?
Play the knave finely.
So I will, I warrant ye,
And carefully.
'Pray ye doe not trouble him,
You see he's weak and has a wandering fancy.
My honest Neighbours, weep not, I must leave ye,
I cannot always bear ye company,
We must drop still, there is no remedy:
'Pray ye Master Curate, will ye write my Testament,
And write it largely it may be remembered
And be witness to my Legacies good Gentlemen;
Your worship I doe make my full Executor,
You are a man of wit and understanding:
Give me a cup of wine to raise my Spirits,
For I speak low: I wou???d before these Neighbours
Have ye to swear (Sir) that you will see it executed,
And what I give, let equally be rendered
For my souls health.
I vow it truly, Neighbours,
Let not that trouble ye before all these,
Once more I give my Oath.
Then set me higher,
And pray ye come near me all.
We are ready for ye.
Now spur the Ass, and get our friend time.
First then,
After I have given my Body to the worms
(For they must be served first, they are seldom cozened)
Remember your Parish, Neighbour.
Y u speak truly,
I doe remember it, a lewd vile Parish,
And pray it may be mended: To the Poor of it,
(Which is to all the Parish) I give nothing,
For nothing, unto nothing, is most natural,
Yet leave as much space, as will build an Hospital,
Their children may pray for me.
What doe you give to it?
Set down two thousand Ducats,
It is a good gift,
And will be long remembered.
To your worship,
(Because you must take pains to see all finished)
I give two thousand more, it may be three, Sir,
A poor gratuity for your paines-taking.
These are large sums;
Nothing to him that has 'em.
To my old Master Vicar, I give five hundred,
(Five hundred, and five hundred, are too few Sir)
But there be more to serve.
This fellow coins sure.
Give me some more drink. Pray ye buy Books, buy Books,
You have a learned head, stuff it with Libraries,
And understand 'em, when ye have done, it is Justice,
Run not the Parish mad with Controversies,
Nor preach not Abstinence to longing women,
Twill budge the bottoms of their consciences:
I would give the Church new Organs, but I prophecy
The Church-wardens would quickly pipe'em out o'th'Parish,
Two hundred Ducats more to mend the chancel,
And to paint true Orthography, as many,
They write Sunt with a C, which is abominable,
'Pray you set that down, to poor Maidens marriages.
I that's well thought of, what's your will in that point?
A meritorious thing.
No end of this will?
I give per annum two hundred ells of Lockram,
That there be no strait dealings in their Linens,
But the Sails cut according to their Burdens;
To all Bell-Ringers, I bequeath new Ropes,
And let them use 'em at their own discretions.
You may remember us.
I doe, good Gentlemen,
And I bequeath ye both good careful Surgeons
A Legacy, you have need of, more then money,
I know you want good Diets and good Lotions,
And in your pleasures good take heed.
He raves now.
But twill be quickly off,
I doe bequeath ye
Commodities of pins: browne papers: pack-threds,
Roast pork &amp; puddings: Ginger-bread, &amp; Jewes-trumps,
Of penny Pipes, and mouldy Pepper: take 'em,
Take 'em even where you please, and be cozened with 'em,
I should bequeath ye Executions also,
But those I'll leave to th'Law.
Now he grows temperate.
You will give no more?
I am loath to give more from ye,
Because I know you will have a care to execute
Only, to pious uses, Sir, a little.
If he be worth all these, I am made for ever,
I give to fatal Dames, that spin men's threads out,
And poor distressed Damsels, that are militant
As members of our own Afflictions,
A hundred Crowns to buy warm tubbs to work in,
I give five hundred pounds to buy a Church-yard,
A spacious Church-yard, to lay Thieves and knaves in,
Rich men, and honest men, take all the room up.
Are ye not weary?
Never of well-doing.
These are mad Legacies.
They were got as madly;
My Sheep, and Oxen, and my movables,
My Plate, and Jewels, and five hundred Acres;
I have no heirs.
This cannot be, it is Monstrous.
Three Ships at Sea too.
You have made me full Executor.
Full, full, and total, would I had more to give ye
But these may serve an honest mind.
Ye say true,
A very honest mind, and make it rich too;
Rich, wondrous rich, but where shall I raise these monies,
About your house? I see no such great promises;
Where shall I find these sums?
Even where you please Sir,
You are wise and provident and know business
Even raise 'em where you shall think good, I am reasonable
Think good? will that raise thousands?
What doe you make me?
You have sworn to see it done, that's all my comfort.
Where I please? this is packed sure to disgrace me.
Ye are just and honest, and I know you will doe it,
Even where you please, for you know where the wealth is.
I am abused, betrayed, I am laughed at, scorned,
Baffel'd, and board, it seems.
No, no, ye are fooled.
Most finely fooled, and handsomely, and neatly,
Such cunning Masters must be fooled sometimes, Sir,
And have their worships noses wiped, it is healthful,
We are but quit: you fool us of our moneys
In every Cause, in every Quiddit wipe us.
Ha, ha, ha ha, some more drink, for my heart, Gentlemen,
This merry Lawyer??? ha, ha, ha, ha this Scholar???
I think this fit will cure me: this Executor???
I shall laugh out my Lungs.
This is derision above sufferance, villainy
Plotted, and set against me.
Faith it is knavery,
In troth I must confess, thou art fooled indeed, Lawyer.
Did you think, had this man been rich ???
It is well, Sir.
He would have chosen such a Wolf, a Cancker,
A Maggot-pate, to be his whole Executor.
A Lawyer, that entangles all men's honesties,
And lives like a Spider in a Cobweb lurking,
And catching at all Flies, that pass his pitt-falls?
Puts powder to all States, to make em caper?
Would he trust you?
Doe you deserve? I find, Gentlemen,
This Cataplasme of a well cozened Lawyer
Laid to my stomach lenifies my Fever,
Me-thinkes I could eat now and walk a little.
I am ashamed to feel how flat I am cheated,
How grossly, and maliciously made a May-game,
A damned Trick; my wife, my wife, some Rascal:
My credit, and my wife, some lustful villain,
Some Bawd, some Rogue,
Some crafty Fool has found ye:
This it is Sir, to teach ye to be too busy,
To covet all the gains, and all the rumours
To have a stirring oar, in all men's actions.
We did this, but to vex your fine officiousness.
Good yield ye and go'd thank ye: I am fooled, gentlemen;
The Lawyer is an Ass, I doe confess it,
A weak dull shallow Ass: good even to your worships:
Vicar, remember Vicar, Rascal remember,
Thou notable rich Rascal.
I doe remember, Sir,
'Pray ye stay a little, I have even two Legacies
To make your mouth up, Sir.
Remember Varlets,
Quake &amp; remember, Rogues; I have brine for your Buttocks. 
Oh how he frets, and fumes now like a dunghill.
His gall contains fine stuff now to make poisons,
Rare damned stuff.
Let's after him, and still vex him,
And take my Friend off: by this time he has prospered,
He cannot loose this dear time: it is impossible.
Well Diego, thou hast done.
Hast done it daintily.
And shalt be as well paid, Boy???
Go, let's crucify him. 
I have told ye all my story, and how desperately.
I doe believe: let's walk on, time is precious,
Not to be spent in words, here no more wooing,
The open Ayre's an enemy to Lovers, 
Doe as I tell ye.
I'll doe any thing,
I am so over-joy'd, I'll fly to serve ye.
Take your joy moderately, as it is ministered,
And as the cause invites: that man's a fool
That at the sight of the Bond, dances and leaps,
Then is the true joy, when the money comes.
You cannot now deny me.
Nay, you know not,
Women have crotchets, and strange fits.
You shall not.
Hold ye to that and swear it confidently,
Then I shall make a scruple to deny ye:
'Pray ye let's step in, and see a friend of mine,
The weather's sharp: we'll stay but half an hour,
We may be missed else: a private fine house it is, Sir,
And we may find many good welcomes.
Doe Lady,
Doe happy Lady.
All your mind's of doing,
You must be modester.
I will be any thing. ??? 
Open the doors, and give me room to chafe in
Mine own room, and my liberty: why Maid there,
Open, I say, and doe not anger me,
I am subject to much fury: when ye dish-clout?
When doe ye come? a sleep, ye lazy hell-hound?
Nothing intended, but your ease, and eating?
No body here? why wife, why wife? why jewel?
No tongue to answer me? prithee (good Pupil)
Dispense a little with thy careful study,
And step to the door, and let me in; nor he neither?
Ha! not it's study? nor asleep? nor no-body?
I'll make ye hear: the house of Ignorance,
No sound inhabits here: I have a key yet
That commands all: I fear I am metamorphiz'd.
He keeps his fury still, and may doe mischief.
He shall be hanged first, we'll be sticklers there, boys
The hundred thousand Dreams now, that posses him
Of jealousy, and of revenge, and frailty
Of drawing Bills against us, and Petitions.
And casting what his credit shall recover.
Let him cast till his Maw come up, we care not.
You shall be still secured. 
We'll pay him home then;
Hark what a noise he keeps within?
Certain
He has set his Chimneys of fire, or the devil roars there.
The Codixes of the Law are broke loose, Gentlemen.
He's fighting sure,
I'll tell ye that immediately ??? 
Or doing some strange out-rage on himself.
Hang him, he dares not be so valiant.
There's no body at home and he chafes like a Lyon,
And stinks withal. 
No body?
Not a creature,
Nothing within, but he and his Law-tempest,
The Ladies, dishes, kettles, how they fly all?
And how the Glasses through the Rooms?
My friend sure
Has got her out and now he has made an end on it.
See where the Sea comes? how it foams, &amp; brussels?
The great Leviathan of the Law, how it tumbles?
Made every way an Ass? abused on all sides?
And from all quarters, people come to laugh at me?
Rise like a Comet, to be wondered at?
A horrid Comet, for Boys tongues, and Ballads?
I will run from my wits.
Doe, doe, (good Lawyer)
And from thy money too, then thou wilt be quiet.
Here she comes home: now mark the salutations;
How like an Ass my friend goes?
She has pulled his ears down.
Now, what sweet voyage? to what Garden, Lady?
Or to what Cousins house?
Is this my welcome?
I cannot go to Church but thus I am scandall'd,
Use no devotion for my soul, but Gentlemen???
To Church?
Yes, and ye keep sweet youths to wait upon me,
Sweet bred-up youths, to be a credit to me.
There's your delight again, pray take him to ye,
Ho???ever comes near me more to debase me.
How's this? how's this? good wife, how has he wronged ye?
I was fine to drive him like a sheep before me,
I blush to think how people fleer, and scorned me,
Others have handsome men, that know behaviour,
Place, and observance: this silly thing knows nothing,
Cannot tell ten; Let every Rascal justly me,
And still I pushed him on as he had bin coming.
Ha! did ye push him on? is he so stupid?
When others were attentive to the Priest,
Good devout Gentleman, then fell he fast
Fast, sound asleep: then first began the Bag-pipes
The several stops on's nose, made a rare music,
A rare and loud, and those plaid many an Anthem
Put out of that, he fell strait into dreaming.
As cunning, as she is sweet; I like this carriage.
What did he then?
Why then he talked in his Sleep too,
Nay I'll divulge your moral virtues (sheeps-face)
And talked aloud, that every ear was fixed to him:
Did not I suffer (doe you think) in this time?
Talk of your bawling Law, of appellations
Of Declarations, and Excommunications:
Warrants, and Executions: and such devils
That drove all the Gentlemen out of the Church, by hurries
With execrable oaths, they would never come there again
Thus am I served, and manned.
I pray ye forgive me,
I must confess I am not fit to wait upon ye:
Alas, I was brought up ???
To be an Ass,
A Lawyers Ass, to carry Books, and Buckrams.
But what did you at Church?
At Church, did ye ask her?
Doe you hear gentlemen, doe you mark that question?
Because you are half an heretic your self, Sir,
Would ye breed her too? this shall to the Inquisition,
A pious Gentlewoman, reproved for praying?
I'll see this filed, and you shall hear further, Sir.
Ye have an ill heart.
It shall be found out Gentlemen,
There be those youths will search it.
You are warm Seignior,
But a Faggot will warm ye better: we are witnesses.
Enough to hang him, doe not doubt.
Nay certain,
I doe believe has rather no Religion.
That must be known too, because she goes to Church, sir?
O monstrum inform engines!
Let him go on, sir,
His wealth will build a Nunnery, a fair one,
And this good Lady, when he is hanged, and rotten,
May there be Abbess.
You are consent, honest Gentlemen,
I doe not forbid the use, but the form, mark me.
Form? what doe ye make of Form?
They will undo me,
Swear, as I oft have done, and so betray me;
I must make fair way, and hereafter, Wife,
You are welcome home, &amp; henceforth take your pleasure,
Go, when ye shall think fit, I will not hinder ye,
My eyes are open now, and I see my error,
My shame as great as that, but I must hide it.
The whole conveyance now I smell, but Basta,
Another time must serve: you see us friends, now
Heartily friends and no more chiding (gentlemen)
I have bin too foolish, I confess, no more words,
No more (sweet wife.)
You know my easy nature
Go get ye in: you see she has bin angry:
Forbear her sight a while and time will pacify.
And learn to be more bold.
I would I could,
I will doe all I am able. 
Doe Leandro,
We will not part, but friends of all hands.
Well said,
Now ye are reasonable, we can look on ye,
Ye have ierckt me: but for all that I forgive ye
Forgive ye heartily, and doe invite ye
To morrow to a Breakfast, I make but seldom
But now we will be merry.
Now ye are friendly,
Your doggedness and nigardize flung from ye.
And now we will come to ye
Give me your hands, all;
You shall be welcome heartily.
We will be,
For we'll eat hard
The harder, the more welcome,
And till the morning farewell; I have business. 
Farewell good bountiful Bartolus it is a brave wench
A sudden witty Thief, and worth all service:
Go we'll all go, and crucify the Lawyer,
I'll clap four tire of teeth into my mouth more
But I will grind his substance.
Well Leandro,
Thou hast had a strange voyage, but I hope
Thou rid'st now in safe harbour,
Lets go drink, Friends,
And laugh alou'd at all our merry may-games
A match, a match twill whet our stomachs better.
Madam hes come. 
It is well how did he look,
When he knew from whom you were sent? was he not startled?
Or confident? or fearful?
As appeared
Like one that knew his fortune at the worst,
And cared not what could follow.
It is the better
Reach me a Chair: So bring him in, be careful
That none disturb us: I will try his temper,
And if I find him apt for my employments,
I'll work him to my ends, if not I shall
Find other Engines.
Ther's my Lady,
Leave us
You sent for me?
I did, and do's the favour,
Your present state considered, and my power,
Deserve no greater Ceremony?
Ceremony?
I use to pay that, where I doe owe duty,
Not to my Brothers wife: I cannot fawn,
If you expect it from me, you are cozened,
And so farewell.
He bears up still; I like it,
Pray you a word
Yes: I will give you hearing
On equal terms, and sit by you as a friend,
But not stand as a Suitor: Now your pleasure?
You are very bold.
It is fit: since you are proud
I was not made to feed that foolish humour,
With flattery and observance
Yet, with your favour,
A little form joined with respect to her,
That can add to your wants, or free you from 'em
(Nay raise you to a fate, beyond your hopes)
Might well become your wisdom,
It would rather
Write me a Fool, should I but only think
That any good to me, could flow from you,
Whom for so many years: I have found and proved
My greatest Enemy: I am still the same
My wants have not transformed me: I dare tell you,
To your new cerviz'd face, what I have spoken
Freely behind your back, what I think of you,
You are the proudest thing, and have the least,
Reason to be so, that I ever read of
In stature you are a Giantess: and your Tailor
Takes measure of you, with a Iacobs staff,
Or he can never reach you, this by the way
For your large size: Now, in a word, or two
To treat of your Complexion were decorum:
You are so far from fair, I doubt your Mother
Was too familiar with the Moore, that served her,
Your Limbs and Features, I pass briefly over,
As things not worth description; and come roundly
To your soul, if you have any: for it is doubtful
I laugh at this, proceed
This Soul, I speak of
Or rather salt to keep this heap of flesh,
From being a walking stench, like a large Inn,
Stands open for the entertainment of
All impious practises: but ther's no Corner
An honest thought can take up: and as it were not
Sufficient in your self to comprehend
All wicked plots, you have taught the Fool, my Brother
By your contagion, almost to put off
The nature of the man, and turned him Devil
Because he should be like you, and I hope
Will march to hell together: I have spoken,
And if the lemming you, in your true Colours
Can make the Painter gracious, I stand ready
For my reward, or if my words distaste you
I weigh it not, for though your Grooms were ready
To cut my throat for it, be assured I cannot
Use other Language
You think you have said now,
Like a brave fellow: in this Women's War
You ever have bin trained: spoke big: but suffered
Like a tame Ass; and when most spurred and galled
Were never Master of the Spleen or Spirit,
That could raise up the anger of a man,
And force it into action,
Yes vile Creature
Were it thou a subject worthy of my Sword,
Or that thy death, this moment, could call home,
My banished hopes, thou now were it dead: dead (woman)
But being as thou art, it is sufficient
I scorn thee, and contemn thee
This shows nobly:
I must confess it: I am taken with it
For had you kneeled, and whind and showed a base
And low dejected mind, I had despised you
This Bravery (in your adverse fortune) conquers
And do's command me, and upon the sudden
I feel a kind of pity, growing in me,
For your misfortunes, pity some says the Parent,
Of future love, and I repent my part,
So far in what you have suffered, that I could,
(But you are cold) doe something to repair
What your base Brother (such Iami I think him)
Hath brought to ruin
Ha?
Be not amazed,
Our injuries are equal in his Bastard
You are familiar with what I groan for
And though the name of Husband holds a tie
Beyond a Brother, I, a poor weak Woman,
Am sensible, and tender of a wrong,
And to revenge it, would break through all letts,
That durst oppose me.
Is it possible?
By this kiss: start not: thus much, as a stranger
You may take from me; But, if you were pleased,
I should select you, as a bosom Friend,
I would print 'em, thus, and thus,
Keep off.
Come near,
Near into the Cabinet of my Counsels:
Simplicity and patience dwell with Fools,
And let them bear those burdens, which wise men
Boldly shake off; Be mine and join with me,
And when that I have raised you to a fortune,
(Doe not deny your self the happy means)
You'll look on me, with more judicious eyes
And swear I am most fair,
What would this Woman?
The purpose of these words? speak not in riddles
And when I understand what you would counsel,
My answer shall be sudden,
Thus then Iami,
The objects of our fury, are the same,
For young Ascanio, whom you snake like hugged
(Frozen with wants to death) in your warm bosom,
Lives to supplant you in your certain hopes,
And kills in me all comfort.
Now it is plain,
I apprehend you: and were he removed ???
You, once again were the undoubted heir.
It is not to be denied; I was ice before,
But now ye have fired me, ???
I'll add fuel to it,
And by a nearer cut, doe you but steer
As I direct you bring our Bark into
The Port of happiness,
How?
By Henriques death:
But you'll say hoe's your Brother; in great fortunes
(Which are epitomes of States &amp; Kingdoms)
The po???iticke brooke no Rivals.
Excellent.
For sure I think out of a scrupulous fear,
To feed in expectation when I may
(Dispensing but a little with my conscience)
Come into full possession, would not argue
One that desired to thrive,
Now you speak like
A man that knows the World.
I needs must learn
That have so good a Tutoress: And what think you,
(Don Henrique and Ascanio cut off)
That none may live, that shall desire to trace us
In our black paths, if that Octavio
His foster Father' and the sad Iacinta,
(Faith pity her, and free her from her Sorrows)
Should fall Companions with 'em? When we are red
With murder, let us often bath in blood,
The colour will be scarlet.
And that's glorious,
And will protect the fact
Suppose this don:
(If undiscovered) we may get for money,
(As that you know buys any thing in Rome)
A dispensation
And be married?
True.
Or if it be known, truss up our Gold and Jewels,
And fly to some free State, and there with scorn ???
Laugh at the laws of Spain.
It were admirable.
We shall beget rare Children. I am raped with
The mere imagination ???
Shall it be don?
Shall? tic too tedious: furnish me with means
To hire the instruments, and to your self,
Say it is done already: I will show you,
Here the Sun set, how much you have wrought upon me,
Your province is only to use some means,
To send my Brother, to the Grove that's neighbour,
To the west Port of the City; leave the rest,
To my own practise; I have talked too long:
But now will doe: this kiss, with my Confession,
To work a fell revenge: A mans a fool,
If not instructed in a Women's School. 
You are well enough disguised, furnish the Table,
Make no show, what ye are, till I discover
Not a soul knows ye here: be quick and diligent,
These youths, I have invited to a Breakfast,
But what the Sauce will be, I am of opinion
I shall take off the edges of their Appetites,
And grease their gums, for eating heartily;
This month or two they have plaid their prizes with me
And with their several flurts they have lighted dangerously
But sure I shall be quit: I hear 'em coming
Go off, and wait the bringing in your service,
And doe it handsomely: you know where to have it
Welcome i'Faith,
That's well said, honest Lawyer,
Said like a Neighbour
Welcome all: all over
And let's be merry:
To that end we came Sir,
An hour of freedome's worth an age of juglings,
I am come too Sir, to specify my Stomach
A poor retainer to your worships bounty,
And thou shalt have it filled, my merry Diego,
My liberal, and my bonney bounteous Diego
Even fill???d till it groan again
Let it have fair play,
And if it founder then???
I'll tell ye neighbours,
Though I were angry yesterday, with ye all,
And very angry for me thought ye bobbed me.
No, no, by no means.
No, when I considered
It was a jest, and carried off so quaintly
It made me merry: very merry, Gentlemen,
I doe confess I could not sleep to think on it
The mirth so tickled me, I could not slumber,
Good mirth do's work so: honest mirth,
Now, should we have meant in earnest???
You say true Neighbour,
It might have bred such a distaste and soreness,
Such fond imaginations in your Brains, Sir
For things thrust home in earnest ???
Very certain
But I know ye all for merry wigs, and ere long
You shall know me too. in another fashion
Though you're pamper d ye shall bear part 'oth burden.
Come Wife; Come bid 'em welcome; Come my Jewel:
And Pupil, you shall come too; ne'er hang backward,
Come, come the women's pleased, her angers over,
Come, be not bashful,
What do's he prepare here?
Sure ther's no meat 'ith house at least none dressed,
Do's he mean to mock 'em? or some new bred Crotchet
Come o'er his brains; I doe not like his kindness?
But silence best becomes me: if he mean foul play
Sure they are enough to right themselves and let 'em,
I'll sit by, so they beat him not to powder,
Bring in the meat there, ha? Sit down dear Neighbour
A little meat needs little Complement,
Sit down I say:
What doe you mean by this Sir?
Convey away their weapons handsomely,
You know ther's none in the house to answer ye,
But the poor Girl; you know ther's no meat neither
Peace and be quiet; I shall make you smoke else
Ther's men and Meat enough, set it down formally
I fear some lewd trick, yet I dare not speak on it
I have no dainties for ye Gentlemen,
Nor ???odes of meat, to make the room smell of'em
Only a dish to every man I have dedicated,
And if I have pleased his appetite,
O, a Capon,
A Bird of grace, and be thy will, I honour it
For me some forty pound of lovely Beeffe,
Placed in a mediterranean sea of Brewisse
Fall to, fall to that we may drink and laugh after
Wait diligently knaves,
What rare bits this?
An execution, bless me!
Nay take it to ye
Ther's no avoiding it it is somewhat tough Sir,
But a good stomach will endure it easily
The sum is, but a thousand ducats Sir,
A Capias from my Surgeon, and my Silk man,
Your careful makers, but they have mart your diet
Stir not, your Swords are gon: ther's no avoiding me
And these are Algazeirs, doe you hear that passing bell?
A strong Citation, bless me!
Out with your Beads, Curate,
The devils in your dish: bell, book, and Candle,
A warrant to appear before the Judges?
I must needs rise, and turn to'th wall.
Ye need not,
Your fear I hope will make ye find your Breeches,
We are betrayed
Invited, doe not wrong me,
Fall to, good Guests, you have diligent men about ye,
Ye shall want nothing, that may persecute ye
These will not see ye start; Have I now found ye
Have I requited ye? You fool d the Lawyer,
And thought it meritorious, to abuse him,
A thick ram headed knave: you rid, you spurt him,
And glorified your wits, the more ye wronged him;
Within this hour, ye shall have all your Creditors,
A second dish of new debts, come upon ye,
And new invitements to the whip (Don Diego)
And Excommunications for the Learned Curate,
A Masque of all your furies shall dance to ye,
You dare not use us thus?
You shall be bobbed (Gentlemen)
Stir, and as I have a life, ye go to prison
To prison, without pity instantly
Before ye speak another word to prison.
I have a better Guard, without, that waits;
Doe you see this man, Don Curate? it is a Paratour
That comes to tell ye a delightful story.
Of an old whore, ye have and then to teach ye
What is the penalty; Laugh at me now Sir,
What Legacy would ye bequeath me now,
(And pay it on the nail?) to fly my fury?
O gentle Sir,
Dost thou hope I will be gentle,
Thou foolish unconsiderate Curate?
Let me go Sir,
I'll see thee hang first.
And as I am a true Vicar,
Hark in your ear, hark softly ???
No, no bribery.
I'll have my swindge upon thee; Sirha? Rascal?
You lenten Chaps, you that lay sick, and mocked me,
Mocked me, abominably; abused me lewdly
I'll make thee sick at heart, before I leave thee,
And groan, and dye indeed, and be worth nothing
Not worth a blessing, nor a Bell to knell for thee,
A sheet to cover thee, but that thou stealest,
Stealest from the Merchant, and the Ring he was buried with
Stealest from his Grave, doe you smell me now?
Have mercy on me!
No Psalm of mercy shall hold me from hanging thee
How do ye like your Breakfast? it is but short, Gentlemen
But sweet and healthful; Your punishment, and yours, Sir
For some near reasons, that concerns my Credit,
I will take to my self.
Doe Sir, and spare not
I have bin too good a wife, and too obedient,
But since ye dare provoke me to be foolish ???
She has, yes, and too worthy of your usage,
Before the world, I justify her goodness,
And turn that man, that dares but taint her virtues,
To my Swords point; that lying man, that base man,
Turn him, but face to face, that I may know him
What have I here?
A Gentleman, a free man,
One that made trial of this Ladies constancy,
And found it strong as fate; Leave off your fooling,
For if you follow this course, you will be Chronicled
For a devil, whilst a Saint she is mentioned,
You know my name indeed; I am now no Lawyer.
Some comfort now, I hope, or else would I were hanged up
And yet the Judge, he makes me sweat.
What news now?
I will justify upon my life, and Credit
What you have heard, for truth, and will make prooffe of
I will be ready at the appointed hour there,
And so I leave ye.
Stay I beseech your worship,
And doe but hear me,
Good Sir, intend this business,
And let this bawling Fool; No more words Lawyer,
And no more angers, for I guess your reasons,
This Gentleman, i'll justify in all places,
And that fair Ladies worth; Let who dare cross it,
The Plot was cast by me, to make thee jealous,
But not to wrong your wife, she is fair and virtuous,
Take us to mercy too, we beseech your honour,
We shall be justified the way of all flesh else,
No more talk, nor no more dissention Lawyer,
I know your anger, it is a vain and slight one,
For if you doe; i'll lay your whole life open
A life that all the world shall i'll bring witness,
And rip before a Judge the ulcerous villainies
You know I know ye, and I can bring witness.
Nay good Sir, noble Sir.
Be at peace then presently,
Immediately take honest and fair truce
With your good Wife, and shake hands with that Gentleman;
Has honoured ye too much, and doe it cheerfully,
Take us along, for heaven sake too.
I am Friends,
There is no remedy, I must put up all,
And like my neighbours rub it ou't by the shoulders,
And perfect friends; Leandro now I thank ye,
And ther's my hand, I have no more grudge to ye,
But I am too mean henceforward for your Company,
I shall not trouble ye,
We will be friends too:
Nay Lawyer, you shall not fright us farther,
For all your devils wee will bolt,
I grant ye.
The Gentleman's your Bail and thank his coming,
Did not he know me too well, you should smart for it;
Go all in peace, but when ye Fool next, Gentlemen,
Come not to me to Breakfast.
I'll be baked first.
And pray ye remember, when ye are bold &amp; merry,
The Lawyers Bancket, and the Sauce he gave ye,
Come: go along; I have employment for ye,
Employment for your lewd brains too, to cool ye.
For all, for every one.
We are all your Servants.
All, all for any thing, from this day forward,
I'll hate all Breakefasts, and depend on dinners
I am glad you come off fair
The fair has blessed me.
This is the place, but why we are appointed
By Don Iami to stay here, is a depth
I cannot sound,
Believe it he is too noble,
To purpose any thing but for our good
Had I assurance of a thousand Lives,
And with them perpetuity of pleasure,
And should loose all, if he proved only false,
Yet I durst run the hazard,
It is our comfort,
We cannot be more wretched then we are,
And death concludes all misery,
Undiscovered
We must attend him
Our stay is not long
With him Don Henrique?
Now I fear;
Be silent.
Why dost thou follow me?
To save your life,
A plot is laid for it, all my wrongs forgot,
I have a Brothers Love,
But thy false self,
I fear no enemy.
You have no Friend,
But what breathes in me: If you move a step
Beyond this ground you tread on: you are lost.
It is by thy practise then: I am sent hither
To meet her, that prefers my life, and safety
Before her own.
That you should be abused thus
With weak credulity: She for whose sake,
You have forgot we had one noble Father,
Or that one Mother bare us, for whose love,
You break a contract, to which heaven was witness,
To satisfy whose pride, and wilful humour,
You have exposed a sweet, and hopeful Son,
To all the miseries, that want can bring him,
And such a Son, though you are most obdurate,
To give whom entertainment Savages
Would quit their Caves themselves, to keep him from
Bleak cold, and hunger: This dissembling Woman,
This Idol, whom you worship: all your love
And service trod under her feet, designs you
To fill a grave or dead, to lye a pray,
For Wolves, and vultures.
It is false; I defy thee,
And stand upon my Guard
Alas, it is weak:
Come on, since you will teach me to be cruel,
By having no faith, in me, take your fortune,
Bring the rest forth, and bind them fast.
My Lord.
In what have we offended?
I am deaf,
And following my will, I doe not stand
Accountable to reason: See her Ring
(The first pledge of your love, and service to her)
Delivered as a Warrant for your death:
These Bags of gold you gave up to her trust,
(The use of which, you did deny your self)
Bestowed on me, and with a prodigal hand,
Whom she picked forth to be the Architect
Of her most bloody building; and to Fee
These Instruments, to bring Materials
To raise it up, she bad me spare no cost,
And (as a surplusage) offered her self
To be at my devotion.
O accursed!
But be incredulous still; think this my plot;
Fashion excuses to your self, and swear
That she is innocent, that she dotes on ye;
Believe this, as a fearful Dream, and that
You Isle not at my mercy, which in this
I will show only: She her self shall give
The dreadful Sentence, to remove all scruple
Who it is that sends you to the other world.
Appears my Violante? speak (my dearest)
Do's not the object please you?
More then if
All Treasure that's above the earth, with that,
That lies concealed in both the Indian Mines,
Were laid down at my feet: O bold Iamy
Thou only can deserve me.
I am forward,
And (as you easily may perceive,) I sleep not
On your commands.
But yet they live: I looked
To find them dead.
That was deferred, that you
Might triumph in their misery, and have the power
To say they are not,
It was well thought upon:
This kiss, and all the pleasures of my Bed
This night, shall thank thee.
Monster!
You Sir, that
Would have me mother Bastards, being unable
To honour me with one Child of mine own,
That underneath my Roof, kept your cast-Strumpet,
And out of my Revenues, would maintain
Her riotous issue: Now you find what it is
To tempt a woman: with as little feeling
As I turn off a slave, that is unfit
To doe me service; or a horse, or dog
That have outlived their use, I shake thee off,
To make thy peace with heaven.
I doe deserve this,
And never truly felt before, what sorrow
Attends on wilful dotage.
For you, Mistress,
That had the pleasure of his youth before me,
And triumphed in the fruit, that you had by him,
But that I think, to have the Bastard strangled
Before thy face, and thou with speed to follow
The way he leads thee, is sufficient torture,
I would cut off thy nose, put out thine eyes,
And set my foot on these bewitching lips,
That had the start of mine: but as thou art,
Go to the grave unpitied.
Who would believe
Such rage could be in woman?
For this Fellow,
He is not worth my knowledge.
Let him live then,
Since you esteem him innocent.
No, Iamy,
He shall make up the mess: now strike together
And let them fall so.
Unheard of cruelty
I can endure no longer: seize on her.
Am I betrayed?
Is this thy faith, Iamy?
Could your desires
Challenge performance of a deed so horrid?
Or, though that you had sold your self to hell,
I should make up the bargain? Live (dear Brother)
Live long, and happy: I forgive you freely;
To have done you this service, is to me
A fair Inheritance: And how ever harsh language
(Called on, by your rough usage) passed my lips,
In my heart, I ever loved you: All my labours
Were but to show, how much your love was cozened,
When it beheld it self in this false Glass,
That did abuse you; and I am so far
From envying young Ascanio his good fortune,
That if your State were mine, I would adopt him.
These are the Murderers my noble Friends,
Which (to make trial of her bloody purpose)
I won, to come disguised thus.
I am too full
Of grief, and shame to speak: but what I'll doe,
Shall to the world proclaim my penitence;
And howsoever I have lived, I'll die
A much changed man.
Were it but possible
You could make satisfaction to this woman,
Our joys were perfect.
That's my only comfort,
That it is in my power: I ne'er was married
To this bad woman, though I doted on her,
But daily did defer it still expecting
When grief would kill Iacintha.
All is come out,
And finds a fair success: take her Don Henrique,
And once again embrace your Son.
Most gladly.
Your Brother hath deserved well.
And shall share
The moitie of my State,
I have heard, Advocate,
What an ill Instrument you have bin to him,
From this time strengthen him, with honest counsels,
As you'll deserve my pardon.
I'll change my Copy:
But I am punished, for I fear I have had
A smart blow, though unseen.
Curate, and Sexton,
I have heard of you too, let me hear no more,
And what's past, is forgotten; For this woman,
Though her intent were bloody, yet our Law
Calls it not death: yet that her punishment
May deter others from such bad attempts,
The Dowry she brought with her shall be employed
To build a Nunnery, where she shall spend
The remnant of her life.
Since I have missed my ends,
I scorn what can fall on me.
The strict discipline
Of the Church, will teach you better thoughts. And Signiors.
You that are Bachelors, if you ever marry,
In Bartolus, you may behold the issue
Of Covetousness, and Jealousy; And of dotage,
And falsehood in Don Henrique keep a mean then;
For be assured that weak man meets all ill,
That gives himself up to a women's will.
TO tell ye (Gentlemen,) we have a Play,
A new one too, and that it is launched to day,
The Name ye know, that's nothing to my Story;
To tell ye, it is familiar, void of Glory;
Of State, of Bitterness: of wit you'll say,
For that is now held wit, that tends that way,
Which we avoid: To tell ye to it is merry,
And meant to make ye pleasant, and not weary:
The Stream that guides ye, easy to attend:
To tell ye that it is good, is to no end,
If you believe not. Nay, to go thus far,
To swear it, if you swear against, is war
To assure you any thing, unless you see,
And so conceive, is vanity in me;
Therefore I leave it to it self, and pray
Like a good Bark, it may work out to day,
And stem all doubts; it was built for such a proof,
And we hope highly: if she lye aloof
For her own vantage, to give wind at will,
Why let her work, only be you but still,
And sweet opinioned, and we are bound to say,
You are worthy Judges, and you crown the Play.
THe Play is done, yet our Suit never ends,
Still when you part, you would still part our friends,
Our noblest friends; if ought have fallen amiss,
O let it be sufficient, that it is,
And you have pardoned it. In Buildings great
All the whole Body, cannot be so neat,
But something may be mended; Those are fair,
And worthy love, that may destroy, but spare.

