AND as I told you Sir.
I understand you,
Clarinda's still perverse.
Shoe's worse, obdurate,
Flinty relentless, my love-passions jeered at,
My presents scorned.
It is strange a waiting-woman,
In her condition apt to yield, should hold out,
A man of your place, reverend beard and shape,
Besieging her.
You might add too my wealth,
Which she contemns, five hundred Crowns per annum,
For which I have ventured hard, my conscience knows it,
Not thought upon, though offered for a Joyinture:
This Chain which my Lords Peasants worship, stouted;
My solemn hums and he's, the servants quake at,
No Rhetoric with her; every hour she hangs out
Some new flag of defiance to torment me:
Last Lent my Lady called me her poor John,
But now I am grown a walking Skeleton,
You may see through and through me.
Indeed you are much fallen away.
I am a kind of nothing,
As she hath made me: love's a terrible glister,
And if some Cordial of her favours help not,
I shall like an Italian dye backward,
And breath my last the wrong way.
As I live you have my pity; but this is cold comfort,
And in a friend lip-physick; and now I think on it,
I should doe more, and will, so you deny not
Your self the means of comfort.
Isle be hanged first: one dram of't I beseech you.
You are not jealous of any mans access to her?
I would not receive the Dor, but as a bosom friend
You shall direct me, still provided that
I understand who is the man, and what
His purpose that pleads for me.
By all means.
First, for the undertaker I am he:
The means that I will practise, thus—
Pray you forward,
You know your Lady chaste Caliste loves her.
Too well, that makes her proud.
Nay, give me leave.
This beauteous Lady, I may stile her so,
(Being the paragon of France for feature)
Is not alone contented in her self
To seeem, and be good, but desires to make
All such as have dependence on her like her;
For this Clarinda's liberty is restrained;
And though her kinsman the gate's shut against me;
Now if you please to make your self the door,
For my conveyance to her, though you run
The hazard of a check for it, it is no matter.
It being for mine own ends.
Isle give it o'er,
If that you make the least doubt otherwise:
Studying upon it? good morrow.
Pray you stay sir;
You are my friend: yet as the Proverb says,
When love puts in, friendship is gone: suppose
You should your self affect her?
Do you think Isle commit Incest; for it is no less,
She being my cousin Germane. Fare you well sir.
I had forgot that; for this once forgive me.
Only to ease the throbbing of my heart,
(For I doe feel strange pangs) instruct me what
You will say for me.
First, Isle tell her that
She hath so far besotted you, that you have
Almost forgot to cast account.
Mere truth sir.
That of a wise and provident Steward,
You are turned stark Ass.
Urge that point home, I am so.
That you adore the ground she treads upon,
And kiss her foot-steps.
As I doe when I find their print in the Snow.
A loving fool I know it,
By your bloudlesse-frosty lips: then having related
How much you suffer for her, and how well
You doe deserve it—
How? to suffer?
No sir, to have your love returned.
That's good, I thank you.
I will deliver her an Inventory
Of your good parts: as this your precious nose,
Dropping affection: your high-forehead, reaching
Almost to the crown of your head; your slender waste,
And a back not like a threshers, but a bending
And Court-like back, and so forth, for your body.
But when I touch your mind, for that must take her,
(Since your out-side promises little) Isle enlarge it,
(Though ne'er so narrow) as your Arts to thrive,
Your composition with the Cook, and Butler,
Fory Coney-skins and Chippings, and half a share
With all the under-officers of the house,
In strangers bounties, that she shall have all,
And you as it were her Bailiff.
As I will be.
As you shall, so Isle promise. Then your qualities.
As playing on a Gytterne, or Jewes Trump.
A little too on the Vial.
I care you nothing.
Then singing her asleep with curious catches
Of your own making: for as I have heard,
You are Poetical.
Something given that way.
Yet my works seldom thrive: and the main reason
The Poets urge for it, is, because I am not
As poor as they are.
Very likely: fetch her,
While I am in the vain.
It is an apt time, my Lady being at her prayers.
Let her pray on.
Nay go, and if upon my intercession
She doe you not some favour, Isle disclaim her;
Isle ruminate on it the while.
A hundred Crowns is your reward.
Without 'em—nay, no trifling. 
That this dull clod of ignorance should know
How to get money, yet want eyes to see
How grossly hoe's abused, and wrought upon,
When he should make his will, the rogues turned rampant,
As he had renewed his youth: A handsome wench
Love one a spittle-whore would run away from?
Well Master Steward, I will plead for you
In such a Method, as it shall appear
You are fit to be a property.
Yonder he walks
That knows my worth and value, though you scorn it.
If my Lady know not this—
Isle answer it:
If you were a Nun, I hope your cousin German
Might talk with you through a grate, but you are none,
And therefore may come closer: ne'er hang off,
As I live you shall bill: you may salute as strangers,
Custom allows it. Now, now, come upon her
With all your Oratory, tickle her to the quick,
As a young advocate should, and leave no virtue
Of mine unmentioned, Isle stand Sentinel;
Nay keep the door my self. 
How have you worked
This piece of motley to your ends?
Of that at leisure, Mistress. 
Lower, you are too loud,
Though the fool be deaf some of the house may hear you.
Suppose they should, I am a gentleman,
And held your kinseman, under that I hope
I may be free.
I grant it, but with caution;
But be not seen to talk with me familiarly,
But at fit distance, or not seen at all,
It were the better: you know my Ladies humour,
She is all honour, and composed of goodness,
(As she pretends) and you having no business,
How jealous may she grow?
I will be ruled.
But you have promised, and I must enjoy you.
We shall find time for that; you are too hasty:
Make your self fit, and I shall make occasion,
Deli•oration makes best in that business,
And contents every way.
But you must feed
This foolish Steward with some shadow of
A future favour, that we may preserve him
To be our instrument.
Hang him.
For my sake sweet,
I undertook to speak for him, any bauble,
Or slight employment in the way of service,
Will feed him fat.
Leave him to me, 
She comes. My Lady.
I will satisfy her.
How far have you prevailed?
Observe.
Monsieur Malfort.
I must be brief, my cousin hath spoke much
In your behalf, and to give you some proof,
I entertain you as my servant,
You shall have the grace.
Upon your knee receive it,
And take it a special favour from me,
To tie my shoe.
I am ore-joy'd.
Good reason.
You may come higher in time.
No more, the Lady. 
She frowns.
I thank you for this visit cousin,
But without leave hereafter from my Lady,
I dare not change discourse with you.
Pray you take your mornings draught.
I thank you: 
Happiness attend your honour.
Who gave warrant to this private parley?
My innocence; I hope
My conference with a kinseman cannot call
Your anger on me.
Kinsman? Let me have
No more of this, as you desire you may continue mine.
Why Madam (under pardon)
Suppose him otherwise: yet coming in
A lawful way it is excusable.
How's this?
I grant you are made of pureness,
And that your tenderness of honour holds
The sovereignty o'er your passions. Yet you have
A noble Husband, with allowed embraces,
To quench lascivious fires, should such flame in you,
As I must ne'er believe. Were I the wife
Of one that could but zany brave Cleander,
Even in his least perfections, (excuse
My ore-bold inference) I should desire
To meet no other object.
You grow saucy. Doe I look further?
No, dear Madam: and
It is my wonder or astonishment rather,
You could deny the service of Lisandar;
A man without a rival: one the King
And Kingdom gazes on with admiration,
For all the excellencies a mother could
Wish in her only son.
Did not mine honour
And Obligation to Cleander, force me
To be deaf to his complaints?
It is true; but yet
Your rigour to command him from your presence,
Argued but small compassion; the Groves
Witness his grievous sufferings, your fair name
Upon the rhinde of every gentle Poplar,
And amorous Myrtle, (trees to Venus sacred)
With adoration carved, and kneeled unto,
This you (unseen of him) both saw and heard
Without compassion, and what received he
For his true sorrows? but the heavy knowledge,
That it was your peremptory will and pleasure,
(How ever my Lord lived in him) he should quit
Your sight and house for ever.
I confess I gave him a strong potion to work
Upon his hot blood, and I hope twill cure him:
Yet I could wish the cause had concerned others,
I might have met his sorrows with more pity;
At least have lent some counsel to his miseries,
Though now for honour sake, I must forget him,
And never know the name more of Lisander:
Yet in my justice I am bound to grant him,
(Laying his love aside) most truly noble.
But mention him no more, this instant hour
My brother Lidian, new returned from travail,
And his brave friend Clarange, long since rivals
For fair and rich Olinda, are to hear
Her absolute determination, whom
She pleases to elect: see all things ready
To entertain 'em: and on my displeasure
No more words of Lisander.
She endures to hear him named by no tongue but her own:
How ever she carries it, I know she loves him. 
Hard nature: hard condition of poor women!
That where we are most sued too, we must fly most.
The trees grow up, and mix together freely,
The Ok not envious of the sailing Cedart
The lusty Vine not jealous of the Ivy
Because she clips the Elm; the flowers shoot up,
And wantonly kiss one another hourly,
This blossom glorying in the others beauty,
And yet they smell as sweet, and look as lovely:
But we are tied to grow alone. O honour,
Thou hard Law to our lives, chain to our freedoms;
He that invented thee had many curses;
How is my soul divided? O Cleander,
My best deserving husband! O Lisander!
The truest lover that ever sacrificed
To Cupped against Hymen: O mine honour;
A Tyrant, yet to be obeyed, and it is
But justice we should thy strict Laws endure,
Since our obedience to thee keeps us pure. 
How insupportable the difference
Of dear friends is, the sorrow that I feel
For my Lisanders absence, one that stamps
A reverend print on friendship, does assure me
You are rivals for a Lady, a fair Lady,
And in the acquisition of her favours,
Hazard the cutting of that Gordian knot
From your first childhood to this present hour,
By all the ties of love and amity fastend,
I am blessed in a wife (heaven make me thankful)
Inferior to none (sans pride I speak it)
Yet if I were a free-man, and could purchase
At any rate the certainty to enjoy
Lisanders conversation while I lived,
Forgive me my Caliste and the Sex,
I never would seek change.
My Lord and brother,
I da e not blame your choice, Lisanders worth,
Being a Mistress to be ever courted;
Nor shall our equal suit to fair Olinda
Weaken, but add strength to our true affection,
With zeal so long continued.
When we know
Whom she prefers, as she can choose but one,
By our so long tried friendship we have vowed
The other shall desist.
It is yet your purpose,
But how this resolution will hold
In him that is refused, is not alone
Doubtful, but dangerous.
The rich heir is come sir.
Madam Olinda.
Yes sir, and makes choice,
After some little conference with my Lady,
Of this room to give answer to her suitors.
Already both look pale, between your hopes
To win the prize, and your despair to lose
What you contended for.
No sir, I am armed.
I confident of my interest.
Isle believe ye when you have endured the test.
Is not your garter
Untied? you promised that I should grow higher
In doing you service.
Fall off or you lose me. 
Nay take your place, no Paris now sits judge
On the contending goddesses. You are
The Deity that must make cursed or happy,
One of your languishing servants.
I thus look with equal eyes on both, either deserves
A fairer fortune then they can in reason
Hope for from me; from Lidian I expect,
When I have made him mine, all pleasures that
The sweetness of his manners, youth, and virtues
Can give assurance of: but turning this way
To brave Clarange, in his face appears
A kind of majesty which should command,
Not sue for favour. If the fairest Lady
Of France, set forth with natures best endowments
Nay should I add a Princess of the blood,
Did now lay claim to either for a husband,
So vehement my affection is to both,
My envy at her happiness would kill me.
The strangest love I ever heard.
You can enjoy but one.
The more I say the merrier.
Witness these tears I love both, as I know
You burn with equal flames, and so affect me;
Abundance makes me poor; such is the hard
Condition of my fortune; be your own judges;
If I should favour both, twill taint my honour,
And that before my life I must prefer,
If one I lean to, the other is disvalewed;
You are fiery both, and love will make you warmer,
The warmer still the fitter. You are a fool Lady.
To what may love, and the devil jealousy spur you
Is too apparent: my name's called in question:
Your swords fly out, your angers range at large:
Then what a murder of my modesty follows?
Take heed of that by any means: O innocent,
That will deny a blessing when it is offered,
Would I were murdered so, I would thank my modesty.
What pause you on?
It is at length resolved.
We are on the Rack, uncertain expectation,
The greatest torture.
Command what you please,
And you shall see how willingly we will execute.
Then hear what for your satisfaction,
And to preserve your friendship I resolve
Against my self, and it is not to be altered:
You are both brave gentlemen, Isle still profess it,
Both noble servants, for whose gentle offers,
The undeserving, and the poor Olinda
Is ever bound; you love both, fair, and virtuously;
Would I could be so happy to content both:
Which since I cannot, take this resolute answer;
Go from me both contentedly, and he
That last makes his return, and comes to visit,
Comes to my bed. You know my will: farewell;
My heart's too big to utter more: come friend.
Isle wait on you to your Coach.
You both look blank, I cannot blame you.
We have our dispatches.
Isle home.
And Isle abroad again, Farewell. 
Farewell to ye.
Their blunted departure troubles me: I fear
A sudden and a dangerous division
Of their long love will follow: have you took
Your leave of fair Olinda? 
She is gone sir.
Had you brought news Lisander were returned too,
I were most happy.
•till upon L•sander?
I know he loves me, as he loves his health:
And heaven knows I love him.
I find it so:
For me you have forgot, and what I am to you.
O think not so If you had lost a sister,
You locked all your delights in, it would grieve you:
A little you would wander from the fondness,
You owed your husband: I have lost a friend,
A noble friend, all that was excellent
In man, or man-kinde, was contained within him.
That lost my wife—
Madam, your noble Father—
A see for my good news.
Why? what of him sir?
Is lighted at the door, and longs to see you.
Attend him hither.
O my dear Lisander.
But Isle bee merry: lets meet him my Caliste.
I hope Lasanders love will now be buried:
My father will bring joy enough for one month,
To put him out of his memory.
How doe you son?
Bless my fair child, I am come to visit ye,
To see what house you keep, they say you are bountiful,
I like the noise well, and I come to try it.
Ne'er a great belly yet? how have you trifled?
If I had done so (son) I should have heard on it
On both sides by Saint Denis.
You are nobly welcome sir:
We have time enough for that.
See how she blushes:
It is a good sign you'll mend your fault, how dost thou,
My good Caliste?
Well, now I see you sir;
I hope you bring a fruitfulness along with ye.
Good luck, I never miss, I was ever good at it:
Your mother groaned for it wench, so did some other,
But I durst never tell.
How does your arm sir?
Have you been let blood of late?
Against my will sir.
A fall dear father?
No, a Gun, dear daughter;
Two or three Guns; I have one herein my buttock,
It would trouble a Surgeons teeth to pull it out.
O me! O me!
Nay, if you fall to fainting,
It is time for me to trudge: art such a coward,
At the mere name of hurt to change thy colour?
I have been shot that men might see clean through me
And yet I fainted not: besides my self,
Here are an hospital of hurt men for ye.
What should this wonder be?
I am amazed at it.
What think ye of these? they are every one hurt soundly,
Hurt to the proof, they are through, &amp; through I assure ye;
And that's good game, they scorn your puling scratches.
Who did this sir?
Leave crying, and Isle tell you,
And get your plasters, and your warm stupes ready:
Have you ne'er a Shepherd that can tar us over?
Twill prove a business else, we are so many.
Coming to see you, I was set upon,
I and my men, as we were singing frolickly,
Not dreaming of an ambush of base rogues,
Set on in the forest, I have forgot the name—
Twixt this, and Fountaine-Bleiu?
In the wilde Forest?
The same, the same, in that accursed Forest,
Set on by villains, that make boot of all men.
The Peers of France are pillage there, they shot at us,
Hurt us, un-hors'd us, came to the sword, there plied us,
Oppressed us with fresh multitudes, fresh shot still,
Rogues that would hang themselves for a fresh doublet,
And for a Scarlet Caslock kill their fathers.
Lighted you among these?
Among these murderers,
Our poor bloods were engaged: yet we struck bravely,
And more then once or twice we made them shun us,
And shrink their rugged heads: but we were hurt all.
How came you off? for I even long to hear that.
After our prayers made to heaven to help us,
Or to be merciful unto our souls,
So near we were. Alas poor wench, wipe, wipe.
See heaven sends remedy.
I am glad it is come sir,
My heart was even a bleeding in my body.
A curled hair gentleman stepped in, a stranger,
As he rod by, belike he heard our bickering,
Saw our distresses, drew his sword, and proved
He came to execute, and not to argue.
Lord what a lightning me thought flew about him,
When he once tossed his blade; in face Atones,
While peace inhabited between his eye-browes:
But when his noble anger stirred his mettle,
And blew his fiery parts into a flame,
Like Pallas, when she sits between two armies,
Viewing with horrid brows their sad events,
Such then hee looked: and as her shield had armed him.
This man sir were a friend to give an age for.
This gentleman I must love naturally:
Nothing can keep me off; I pray you go on sir.
I will, for now you please me: this brave youth,
This bud of Mars, for yet he is no riper,
When once he had drawn blood, and fleshed his sword,
Fitted his manly mettle to his spirit,
How he bestirred him? what a lane he made?
And through their fiery Bullets thrust securely:
The hardened villains wondering at his confidence,
Lame as I was I followed, and admired too,
And stirred, and laid about me with new spirit,
My men too with new hearts thrust into action,
And down the rogues went.
I am struck with wonder.
Remember but the story of strong Hector,
When like to lightning he broke through his van-guard,
How the Greeks frighted ran away by Troops,
And trod down Troops to save their lives: so this man,
Dispersed these slaves: had they been more and mightier,
He had come off the greater, and more wonder.
Where is the man, good sir, that we may honour him?
That we may fall in superstition to him.
I know not that, from me he late departed,
But not without that pious care to see safe
Me, and my weak men lodged, and dressed; I urged him
First hither, that I might more freely thank him:
He told me he had business craved my pardon,
Business of much import.
Know you his name?
That he denied me too: a vow had bard him.
In that he was not noble to be nameless.
Daughter you must remēber him when I am dead,
And in a noble sort requite his piety,
It was his desire to dedicate this service
To your fair thoughts.
He knows me then?
I named you,
And named you mine: I think that's all his knowledge.
No name, no being?
Now I am mad to know him:
Saving mine honour, any thing I had now
But to enjoy his sight, but his bare picture;
Make me his Saint, I must needs honour him.
I know his name.
There's thy reward for it; speak it.
His man told me, but he desired my silence.
O Jasper speak, it is thy good Masters cause too:
We all are bound ingratitude to compel thee.
Lisander, Yes, I am sure it was Lisander.
Lisander? it was Lisander.
It is Lisander. O my base thoughts? my wicked?
To make question this act could be another mans:
It is Lisander, a handsome timbered man.
Yes.
My Lisander! was this friends absence to bee mourned?
I grant it:
Isle morn his going now, and morn it seriously:
When you weep for him, sir, Isle bear you company.
That so much honour, so much honesty
Should be in one man, to doe things thus bravely,
Make me his Saint, to me give this brave service:
What may I doe to recompense his goodness?
I cannot tell.
Come sir, I know you are sickly, so are your men.
I must confess I am weak,
And fitter for a bed then long discourses.
You shall hear to morrow, to morrow provide Surgeons.
Lisander—
What new fire is this? 
Prithee good Lancelot remember that
Thy Masters life is in thy trust, and therefore
Be very careful.
I will lose mine own, rather then hazard yours.
Take what disguise
You in your own discretion shall think fittest,
To keep your self unknown.
I warrant ye;
It is not the first time I have gone invisible:
I am as fine a Fairy in a business
Concerning night-worke—
Leave your vanities:
With this purse (which delivered,
You may spare your Oratory) convey this Letter to
Caliste's woman.
It is a handsome girl, Mistress Clarinda.
I have made her mine. You know your work.
And if I sweat not in it,
At my return discarde me. 
O Caliste! the fairest! cruelest!
So early stirring? a good day to you.
I was viewing sir,
The site of your house, and the handsomeness about it:
Believe me it stands healthfully and sweetly.
The house and master of it really
Are ever at your service.
I return it:
Now if you please go forward in your story
Of your dear friend and Mistress.
I will tell it,
And tell it short, because it is breakfast time,
(And love a tedious thing to a quick stomach)
You eat not yesternight.
I shall endure sir.
My self (and as I then delivered to you)
A gentleman of noble hope, one Lidian,
Both brought up from our infancy together,
One company, one friendship, and one exercise,
Ever affecting, one bed holding us,
One grief, and one joy parted still between us,
More then companions, twins in all our actions,
We grew up till we were men, held one heart still:
Time called us on to Arms, we were one soldier,
Alike we sought our dangers and our honours,
Gloried alike one in another nobleness:
When Arms had made us fit, we were one lover,
We loved one woman, loved without division,
And wooed a long time with one fair affection;
And she, as it appears, loves us alike too.
At length considering what our love must grow to,
And covet in the end, this one was parted,
Rivals and honours make men stand at distance.
We then wooed with advantage, but were friends still,
Saluted fairly, kept the peace of love,
We could not both enjoy the Ladies favour,
Without some scandal to her reputation,
We put it to her choice, this was her sentence,
To part both from her, and the last returning
Should be her Lord; we obeyed, and now you know it;
And for my part, (so truly I am touched with it)
I will go far enough, and be the last too,
Or ne'er return:
A sentence of much cruelty;
But mild, compared with whats pronounced on me.
Our loving youth is borne to many miseries.
What is that Lidian pray ye?
Caliste's brother, if ever you have heard of that fair Lady.
I have seen her sir.
Then you have seen a wonder.
I doe confess: of what years is this Lidian?
About my years: there is not much between us.
I long to know him.
It is a virtuous longing,
As many hopes hang on his noble head,
As blossoms on a bough in May, and sweet ones.
Ye are a fair story of your friend.
Of truth sir: now, what's the matter?
There is a gentleman
At door, would speak with you on private business.
With me?
He says so, and brings haste about him.
Wait on him in. 
I will retire the while, to the next room.
We shall not long disturb you. 
Save ye sir.
The like to you fair sir: pray you come near.
Pray you instruct me for I know you not.
With Monsieur Clarange I would speak.
I am he sir:
Ye are nobly welcome; I wait your business.
This will inform you.
Will you please to sit down? 
He shall command me sir, Isle wait upon him
Within this hour.
You're a noble gentleman,
Will it please you bring a friend? we are two of us,
And pity either sir should be unfurnished.
I have none now, and the time is set so short,
Twill not be possible.
Doe me the honour:
I know you are so full of brave acquaintance,
And worthy friends, you cannot want a partner:
I would be loath to stand still sir; besides,
You know the custom, and the vantage of it,
If you come in alone.
And I must meet it.
Send, we'll defer an hour, let us be equal:
Games won and lost on equal terms show fairest.
It is to no purpose to send any whither,
Unless men be at home by Revelation:
So please you breath a while; when I have done with him
You may be exercised too: Isle trouble no man.
They are very loud. Now what's the news?
I must leave you,
Leave you a while, two hours hence Isle return friend.
Why, what's the matter?
A little business.
And't be but a little, you may take me with ye.
Twill be a trouble to you.
No indeed, to do you service, I account a pleasure.
I must alone.
Why?
It is necessity—
Before you pass the walks, and back again,
I will be with ye.
If it be not unmannerly
To press you, I would go.
Isle tell you true sir,
This gentleman and I upon appointment,
Are going to visit a Lady.
I am no Capuchin, why should not I go?
Take the gentleman,
Come he may see the gentlewoman too,
And be most welcome, I do beseech you take him.
By any means, I love to see a gentlewoman,
A pretty wench too.
Well sir, we'll meet you,
And at the place: My service to the Lady.
I kiss your hand. 
Prithee read o'er her Letter.
I Know you have considered the dark sentence Olinda gave us, and that (however she disguised it) it pointed more at our swords edges then our bodies banishments; the last must enjoy her: if we retire, our youths ars lost in wandering; in emulation we shall grow old men, and feeble, Which is the scorn of love, and rust of honour, and so return more fit to wed our Sepulchers, then the Saint we aim at; let us therefore make our journey short, and our hearts rea∣die, and with ou• swords in our hands put it to fortune, which shall be worthy to receive that blessing, Isle stay you on the mountain, our old hunting place, this gentleman alone runs the hazard with me, and so I kiss your hand.
Is this your wench? you'll find her a sharp Mistress.
What have I thrust my self into? is this that Lidian
You told me of?
The same.
My Ladies brother?
No cause to heave my sword against but his?
To save the father yesterday, and this morning,
To help to kill the son? this is most courteous?
The only way to make the daughter dote on me.
Why doe you muse? would ye go off?
No, no, I must on now; this will be kindly taken;
No life to sacrifice, but part of hers?
Doe you fight straight?
Yes, presently.
To morrow then,
The baleful tidings of this day will break out,
And this nights Sun will set in blood; I am troubled:
If I am killed, I am happy.
Will you go friend?
I am ready sir, fortune thou hast made me monstrous. 
Your cousin, and my true friend, lusty Leon,
Shall know how you use me.
Be more temperate,
Or I will never use, nor know you more
In the way of a servant: all the house takes notice
Of your ridiculous foppery; I have no sooner
Performed my duties in my Ladies chamber,
And she scarce down the stairs, but you appear
Like my evil spirit to me.
Can the fish live out of the water, or the Salamander
Out of the fire? or I live warm, but in
The frying-pan of your favour?
Pray you forget
Your curious comparisons, borrowed from
The pond, and kitchen, and remember what
My Ladies pleasure is forth' entertainment
Of her noble father.
I would learn the art of memory in your table book.
Very good sir, no more but up and ride, I apprehend
Your meaning, soft fire makes sweet malt sir:
I'll answer you in a Provetbe,
But one kiss from thy honey lip.
You sight too high, my hand is
A fair ascent from my foot, his slavering kisses
Spoil me more gloves,—enough for once, you'll surfeit
With too much grace.
Have you no employment for me?
Yes, yes, go send for Leon, and convey him
Into the private Arbour, from his mouth
I hear your praises with more faith.
I am gone-yet one thing ere I go, there's at the door
The rarest Fortune-teller, he hath told me
The strangest things; he knows ye are my Mistress,
And under seal delivered how many children
I shall beget on you, pray you give him hearing,
He'll make it good to you.
A cunning man
Of your own making, howsoe're I'll hear him
At your entreaty.
Now I perceive ye love me,
At my entreaty, come in friend—remember
To speak as I directed, he knows his lesson,
And the right way to please her; this it is
To have a head-peece. 
It is said you can tell Fortunes to come.
Yes Mistress, and what's past;
Unglove your hand, by this straight line, I see
You have lain crooked.
How? lain crooked?
Yes; and in that posture plaid at the old game,
(No body hears me, and I'll be no blab)
And at it lost your maiden-head.
A shrewd fellow;
It is truth, but not to be confessed; in this
Your palmistry deceives you, some thing else sir.
Ye are a great woman with your Lady, and
Acquainted with her counsels.
Still more strange.
There is a noble Knight Lisander loves her,
Whom she regards not▪ and the destinies
With whom I am familiar, have delivered
That by your means alone, he must enjoy her.
Your hand again, Yes, yes; you have already
Promised him your assistance, and what's more,
Tasted his bounty, for which, from the sky
There are 200. crowns dropped in a Purse,
Look back, you'll find it true; nay, open it,
It is good Gold I assure you.
How, two Letters? the first endorsed to me? this to my Lady?
Subscribed Lisander.
And the Fortuneteller, his servant Lancelot.
How had I lost my eyes,
That I could not know thee? not a word of the loss
Of my virginity.
Nor who I am.
I'll use all speedy means for your dispatch,
With a welcome answer, but till you receive it,
Continue thus disguised, Monsieur Malfort
(You know the way to humour him) shall provide
A lodging for you, and good entertainment;
Nay, since we trade both one way, thou shalt have
Some feeling with me, take that.
Bountiful wench may thou ne'er want employment.
Nor such pay boy. 
You're welcome.
Let us do our office first,
And then make choice of a new piece of ground
To try our fortunes.
Ell's fair here.
And here, their swords are equal.
If there be any odds in mine, we will exchange.
We'll talk of that
When we are farther off, farewell.
Farewell friend. 
Come let us not be idle?
I will find you employment, fear not.
You know sir, the cause that brings us hither
There needs no more discoursing,
No time, nor place for repetition now.
Let our Swords argue, and I wish Clarange,
The proud Olinda saw us.
Would she did;
What ever estimation she holds of me,
She should behold me like a man fight for her.
It is nobly said; set on love; and my fortune—
The same for me, come home brave Lidian,
It was manly thrust, this token to the Lady,
Ye have it sir, deliver it, take breath,
I see ye bleed apace, ye shall have fair play.
You must lye there a while, I cannot help you,
Nay, then my fortunes gone, I know I must dye:
Yet dearly will I sell my love, come on both,
And use your fortunes, I expect no favour;
Weak as I am, my confidence shall meet ye.
Yield up your cause and live.
What dost thou hold me?
A recreant, that prefers life before credit?
Though I bleed hard, my honour finds no Issue,
That's constant to my heart.
Have at your life then.
Hold, or I'll turn, and bend my sword against ye;
My cause Clarange too, view this brave Gentleman,
That yet may live to kill you, he stands nobly,
And has as great a promise of the day
As you can tie unto your self, he's ready,
His Sword as sharpe, view him with that remembrance,
That you delivered him to me Clarange:
And with those eyes, that clearness will become ye:
View him, as you reported him; survey him,
Fix on your friendship sir, I know you are noble,
And step but Inward to your old affection,
Examine but that soul grew to your bosom,
And try then if your Sword will bite, it cannot,
The edge will turn again, ashamed, and blunted;
Lidian, you are the pattern of fair friendship,
Exampled for your Love, and imitated,
The Temple of true hearts, stored with affections,
For sweetness of your spirit made a Saint,
Can you decline this nobleness to anger?
To mortal anger? against the man ye love most?
Have ye the name of virtuous, not the nature?
I will sit down.
And I'll sit by you Lidian.
And I'll go on, can heaven be pleased with these things?
To see two hearts that have been twined together
Married in friendship to the world, to wonder,
Of one growth, of one nourishment, one health,
Thus mortally divorced for one weak woman?
Can love be pleased? love is a gentle spirit,
The wind that blows the April flowers, not softer;
She is drawn with doves to show her peacefulness,
Lions and bloody Pards are Mars's servants;
Would ye serve love? do it with humbleness,
Without a noise, with still prayers, and soft murmurs;
Upon her Altars offer your obedience,
And not your brawls; she's won with tears, not terrors:
That fire ye kindle to her deity,
Is only grateful when it blows with sighs,
And holy Incense flung with white hand-innocence;
Ye wound her now; ye are too superstitious,
No sacrifice of blood, or death she longs for:
Came he from heaven?
He tells us truth good Lidian.
That part of Noble love which is most sweet,
And gives eternal being to fair beauty,
Honour. You hack a pieces with your swords,
And that ye fight to crown, ye kill fair credit.
Thus we embrace, no more fight, but all friendship,
And where love pleases to bestow his benefits,
Let us not argue.
Nay brave sir, come in too;
You may love also, and may hope, If he do,
And not rewarded for it, there is no justice;
Farewell friend, here let's part upon our pilgrimage,
It must be so, Cupped draws on our sorrows.
And where the lot lights—
I shall count it happiness,
Farewell dear friend.
First, let's relieve the Gentleman
That lies hurt in your cause, and bring him off,
And take some cure for your hurts, then I will part too,
A third unfortunate, and willing wanderer. 
My fears foresaw't would come to this.
I would your sentence had been milder.
It is past help now.
I share in your despair, and yet my hopes
Have not quite left me, since all possible means
Are practised to prevent the mischief following
Their mortal meeting, my Lord is coasted one way,
My father, though his hurts forbad his travel,
Hath took another, my brother in Law Beronte,
A third, and every minute we must look for
The certain knowledge, which we must endure
With that calm patience heaven shall please to lend us.
Dead both?
Such is the rumour, and it is general.
I hear my passing-bell.
I am in a fever.
They say their seconds too; but what they are,
Is not known yet, some worthy fellows certain.
Where had you knowledge?
Of the Country people, it is spoken every where.
I heard it so too;
And it is so common, I do half believe it,
You have lost a brother wench, he loved you well,
And might have lived to have done his country service,
But he is gone, thou felt untimely Lidian,
But by a valiant hand, that's some small comfort,
And took him with thee too, thou love brave company,
Weeping will do no good, you lost a servant,
He might have lived to have been your Master Lady,
But you feared that.
Good sir, be tender to me,
The news is bad enough, you need not press it.
I loved him well, I loved 'em both.
It seems so.
How many more have you to love so Lady?
They were both fools to fight for such a Fiddle;
Certain there was a dearth of noble anger,
When a slight woman was thought worth a quarrel.
Pray you think nobler.
I'll tell thee what I think, the plague, war, famine,
Nay put in dice and drunkenness, and those
You'll grant are pretty helps, kill not so many
(I mean so many noble) as your loves do,
Rather your lewdness, I crave your mercy women.
Be not offended if I anger ye.
I am sure ye have touched me deep, I came to be merry,
And with my children, but to see one ruined
By this fell accident—are they all dead?
If they be, speak?
What news?
What dead? ye pose me;
I understand you not.
My brother Lidian, Clarange, and their seconds.
Here is one of 'em, and sure this Gentleman's alive.
I hope so, so is your son sir, so is brave Clarange:
They fought indeed, and they were hurt sufficiently;
We were all hurt, that bred the general rumour,
But friends again all, and like friends we parted.
Heard ye of Lisander?
Yes, and missed him narrowly:
He was one of the combatants, fought with this Gentleman,
Second against your brother, by his wisdom
(For certainly good fortune follows him)
All was made peace, I'll tell you the rest at dinner,
For we are hungry.
I before I eat
Must pay a vow I am sworn to; my life Madam
Was at Lisander's mercy, I live by it;
And for the noble favour, he desired me
To kiss your fair hand for him, offering
This second service as a Sacrifice
At the Altar of your virtues.
Come, joy on all sides;
Heaven will not suffer honest men to perish.
Be proud of such a friend.
Forgive me Madam,
It was a grief might have concerned you near too.
No work of excellence but still Lisander,
Go thy ways worthy.
We'll be merry too,
Were I to speak again, I would be wiser. *
Too much of this rare cordial makes me sick,
However I obey you.
Now or never is an apt time to move her, Madam.
Who's that?
Your servant, I would speak with your Ladyship.
Why dost thou look about?
I have private business
That none must hear but you. Lisander—
Where?
Nay, is not here, but would entreat this favour,
Some of your Balsam from your own hand given,
For he is much hurt, and that he thinks would cure him.
He shall have all, my prayers too.
But conceive, me,
It must be from your self immediately,
Pity so brave a Gentleman should perish,
He is superstitious, and he holds your hand
Of infinite power: I would not urge this Madam,
But only in a mans extremes, to help him.
Let him come (good wench) it is that I wish, I am happy in it,
My husband his true friend, my noble father,
The fair Olinda, all desire to see him;
He shall have many hands.
That he desires not,
Nor eyes, but yours to look upon his miseries,
For then he thinks it would be no perfect cure (Madam)
He would come private.
How can that be here?
I shall do wrong unto all those that honour him,
Besides my credit.
Dare ye not trust a hurt man?
Not strain a courtesy to save a Gentleman?
To save his life that has saved all your family?
A man that comes like a poor mortified Pilgrim;
Only to beg a blessing, and depart again?
He would but see you, that he thinks would cure him.
But since you find fit reasons to the contrary,
And that it cannot stand with your clear honour,
Though you best know how well he has deserved of ye:
I'll send him word back, though I grieve to do it,
Grieve at my soul, for certainly twill kill him,
What your will is.
Stay, I will think upon it; where is he wench?
If you desire to see him,
Let not that trouble you, he shall be with ye,
And in that time, that no man shall suspect ye;
Your honour Madam, is in your own free keeping;
Your care in me, in him all honesty;
If ye desire him not, let him pass by ye:
And all this business reckon but a dream.
Go in, and counsel me, I would fine see him,
And willingly comfort him.
It is in your power.
And if you dare trust me, you shall do it safely,
Read that, and let that tell you, how he honours you.
THis happy night. 
Preserve this eagerness
Till we meet nearer, there is something done
Will give us opportunity.
Witty girl, the plot?
You shall hear that at leisure,
The whole house reels with joy at the report
Of Lidians safety, and that joy increased
From their affection to the brave Lisander,
In being made the happy instrument to compound
The bloody difference.
They will hear shortly that
Will turn their mirth to mourning, he was then
The principal means to save two lives, but since
There are two fallen, and by his single hand,
For which his life must answer, if the King,
Whose arm is long, can reach him.
We have now no spare time to hear stories, take this key,
Twill make your passage to the banqueting house
In the garden free.
You will not fail to come?
For mine own sake ne'er doubt it? now for Li∣sander. 
To bed, to bed, it is very late.
To bed all, I have drank a health too much,
You'll sleep the better,
My usual physic that way.
Whore's your Mistress?
She is above, but very ill and aguish:
The late fright of her brother, has much troubled her;
She would entreat to lye alone.
Her pleasure.
Commend my love to her, and my prayers for her health,
I'll see her ere I go. 
All good rest to ye:
Now to my watch for Lisander, when he's furnished,
For mine own friend, since I stand Sentinel,
I love to laugh in the evenings too, and may,
The privilege of my place will warrant it. 
You have done well hitherto; where are we now?
Not far from the house, I hear by th'owles,
There are many of your welch falkoners about it;
Here were a night to choose to run away with
Another mans wife, and do the feat.
Peace knave,
The house is here before us, and some may hear us;
The candles are all out.
But one in the parlour,
I see it simper hither, pray come this way.
Step to the garden door, and feel and 't be open.
I am going, luck deliver me from the saw pits,
Or I am buried quick: I hear a dog,
No, it is a cricket, ha? here's a cuckold buried,
Take heed of his horns sir, here's the door, it is open.
Whose there?
Friend.
Sir, Lisander?
I.
Ye are welcome, follow me, and make no noise.
Go to your horse, and keep your watch with care, sirah
And be sure ye sleep not. 
Send me out the dairy-maid
To play at trump with me, and keep me waking,
My fellow horse, and I now must discourse
Like two learned Almanack-makers, of the stars,
And tell what a plentiful year 'twil prove of drunkards,
If I had but a pottle of Sack, like a sharp prickle,
To knock my nose against when I am nodding,
I should sing like a Nightingale, but I must
Keep watch without it, I am apt to dance,
Good fortune guide me from the fairs circles. 
Come near, 
I'll leave ye now, draw but that Curtain,
And have your wish; now Leon I am for thee.
We that are servants must make use of stolen hours,
And be glad of snatched occasions. 
She is asleep,
Fierce love hath closed his lights, I may look on her,
Within her eyes 'has locked his graces up,
I may behold and live; how sweet she breathes?
The orient morning breaking out in odors,
Is not so full of perfumes, as her breath is;
She is the abstract of all excellence, and scorns a parallel.
Who's there?
Your servant, your most obedient slave (adored Lady)
That comes but to behold those eyes again,
And pay some vows I have to sacred beauty,
And so pass by; I am blind as ignorance,
And know not where I wander, how I live,
Till I receive from their bright influence
Light to direct me, for devotions sake,
You are the Saint I tread these holy steps to.
And holy Saints are all relenting sweetness;
Be not imaged nor be not angry with me;
The greatest attribute of heaven is mercy;
And it is the crown of justice, and the glory
Where it may kill with right, to save with pity.
Why do you kneel, I know you come to mock me,
To upbraid me with the benefits you have given me,
Which are too many, and too mighty sir,
For my return; and I confess it is justice,
That for my cruelty you should despise me,
And I expect however you are calm now,
A foil you strive to set your cause upon,
It will break out; Caliste is unworthy,
Coy, proud, disdain full, I acknowledge all,
Colder of comfort than the frozen North is,
And more a stranger to Lisanders worth,
His youth and faith then it becomes her gratitude,
I blush to grant it, yet take this along,
A sovereign medicine to allay displeasure,
May be an argument to bring me off too;
She is married, and she is chaste; how sweet that sounds?
How it perfumes all ayre it is spoken in?
O dear Lisander, would you break this union?
No, I adore it: let me kiss your hand,
And seal the fair faith of a Gentleman on it.
You are truly valiant, would it not afflict you
To have the horrid name of coward touch you?
Such is the whore to me.
I nobly thank ye;
And may I be the same when I dishonour ye;
This I may do again. 
Ye may, and worthily;
Such comforts maids may grant with modesty,
And neither make her poor, nor wrong her bounty;
Noble Lisander, how fond now am I of ye?
I heard you were hurt.
You dare not heal me Lady?
I am hurt here; how sweetly now she blushes?
Excellent objects kill our sight, she blinds me;
The roses in the pride of May show pale to her;
O tyrant custom! and O coward honour!
How ye compel me to put on mine own chains?
May I not kiss ye now in superstition?
For you appear a thing that I would kneel to:
Let me err that way. 
Ye shall err for once, I have a kind of noble pity on you,
Among your manly sufferings, make this most,
To err no farther in desire, for then sir,
Ye add unto the gratitudes I owe you;
And after death, your dear friends soul shall bless you.
I am wondrous honest.
I dare try. 
I have tasted a blessedness too great for dull mortality
Once more and let me dye.
I dare not murder,
How will maids curse me if I kill with kisses?
And young men fly the embraces of fair virgins?
Come pray sit down, but let's talk temperately.
Is my dear friend a bed?
Yes, and asleep;
Secure asleep, it is midnight too Lisander,
Speak not so loud.
You see I am a Statue,
I could not stand else as I had eaten Ice,
Or took into my blood a drowsy poison,
And natures noblest, brightest flame burn in me;
Midnight? and I stand quietly to behold so?
The alarm rung, and I sleep like a coward?
I am worn away, my faith, and dull obedience
Like crutches, carry my decayed body
Down to the grave, I have no youth within me,
Yet happily you love too.
Love with honour.
Honour? what's that? it is but a specious title
We should not prize too high.
Dearer than life.
The value of it, is as time has made it,
And time and custom have too far insulted,
We are no Gods, to be always tied to strictness,
It is a presumption to show too like 'em;
March but an hour or two under loves ensigns,
We have examples of great memories —
But foul ones too, that greatness cannot cover;
That wife that by example sins, sins double,
And pulls the curtain open to her shame too;
Me thinks to enjoy you thus—
It is no joy Lady,
A longing bride if she stop here, would cry,
The Bridegroom too, and with just cause curse Hymen;
But yield a little, be one hour a woman,
(I do not speak this to compel you Lady)
And give your will but motion, let it stir
But in the taste of that weak fears call evil,
Try it to understand it, we'll do no thing,
You'll never come to know pure good else.
Fie sir.
I have found a way, let's slip into this error
As Innocents, that know not what we did;
As we were dreaming both let us embrace;
The sin is none of ours then, but our fancies;
What have I said? what blasphemy to honour?
O my base thoughts! pray ye take this and shoot me.
My villain thoughts? 
I weep your misery, and would to heaven-what noise?
It comes on louder.
Kill me, and save your self; save your fair honour,
And lay the fault on me, let my life perish,
My base lascivious life, shoot quickly Lady,
Not for the world, retire behind the hangings,
And there stand close —my husband, close Lisander.
Dearest, are you well? 
O my sad heart; my head, my head.
Alas poor soul! what do you out of your bed?
You take cold my Caliste: how do ye?
Not so well sir to lye by ye, my brothers fright—
I had a frightful dream too,
A very frightful dream my best Caliste:
Me thought there came a Dragon to your Chamber,
A furious Dragon (wife) I yet shake at it:
Are all things well?
Shall I shoot him?
No. All well Sir.
'T was but your care of me, your loving care,
Which always watches.
And me thought he came
As if he had risen thus out of his den,
As I do from these hangings.
Dead.
Hold good Sir.
And forced ye in his arms thus.
It was but fancy
That troubled ye, here's nothing to disturb me,
Good sir to rest again, and I am now drowsy,
And will to bed; make no noise dear husband,
But let me sleep: before you can call any body I am a bed.
This, and sweet rest dwell with ye. 
Come out again, and as you love Lisander,
Make haste away, you see his mind is troubled:
Do you know the door ye came at?
Well sweet Lady.
And can ye hit it readily?
I warrant ye;
And must I go? must here end all my happiness?
Here in a dream, as if it had no substance?
For this time friend, or here begin our ruins;
We are both miserable.
This is some comfort
In my afflictions; they are so full already,
They can find no increase.
Dear speak no more.
You must be silent then.
Farewell Lisander, thou joy of man farewell.
Farewell bright Lady,
Honour of woman-kind, a heavenly blessing.
Be ever honest.
I will be a dog else;
The virtues of your mind I'll make my library,
In which I'll study the celestial beauty:
Your constancy, my armour that I'll fight in:
And on my sword your chastity shall sit,
Terror to rebel blood.
Once more farewell: 
O that my modesty could hold you still sir, —he comes again.
Heaven keep my hand from murder,
Murder of him I love.
Away dear friend,
Down to the garden stairs, that way Lisander,
We are betrayed else. 
Honour guard the Innocent. 
Still up? I feared your health.
'Has missed him happily;
I am going now▪ I have done my meditations,
My heart's almost at peace.
To my warm bed then.
I will pray ye lead. 
A Pistol shot in the house?
At these hours? sure some thief, some murderer:
Rise ho, rise all, I am betrayed.
O fortune!
O giddy thing! he has met some opposition,
And killed; I am confounded, lost for ever. 
Now, what's the matter?
Thieves, my noble father, villains, and Rogues.
Indeed, I heard a Pistol, let's search about.
To bed again, they are gone sir,
I will not bid you thank my valour for it;
Gone at the garden door; there were a dozen,
And bravely armed, I saw 'em.
I am glad, glad at the heart.
One shot at me, and missed me.
No, it was at me, the bullet flew close by me,
Close by my ear; another had a huge Sword,
Flourished it thus; but at the point I met him,
But the Rogue taking me to be your Lordship,
(As sure your name is terrible, and we
Not much unlike in the dark) roared out aloud,
It is the kill cow Dorilaus, and away
They ran as they had flown: now you must love me,
Or fear me for my courage wench.
O Rogue?
O lying Rogue, Lisander stumbled Madam,
At the stairs head, and in the fall the shot went off;
Was gone before they rose.
I thank heaven for it.
I was frighted too, it spoiled my game with Leon.
You must sit up; and they had come to your Chamber
What pranks would they have plaid: how came the door open?
I heard 'em when they forced it; up I rose,
Took Durindana in my hand; and like
Orlando, issued forth.
I know you are valiant.
To bed again.
And be you henceforth provident, at sun-rising
We must part for a while.
When you are a bed,
Take leave of her, there twill be worth the taking;
Here it is but a cold ceremony, ere long
We'll find Lisander, or we have ill fortune.
Locke all the doors fast.
Though they all stood open,
My name writ on the door, they dare not enter. 
Turned Hermit?
Yes, and a devout one too: I heard him preach.
That lessens my belief,
For though I grant my Lidian a scholar
As far as fits a Gentleman, he hath studied
Humanity, and in that he is a Master;
Civility of manners, courtship, Arms;
But never aimed at (as I could perceive)
The deep points of divinity.
That confirms his
Devotion to be real, no way tainted
With ostentation, or hypocrisy,
The cankers of Religion; his sermon
So full of gravity and with such sweetness
Delivered, that it drew the admiration
Of all the hearers on him; his own letters
To you, which witness he will leave the world,
And these to fair Olinda, his late Mistress,
In which he hath with all the moving language
That ever expressed Rhetoric, solicited
The Lady to forget him, and make you
Blessed in her embraces, may remove
All scrupulous doubts.
It strikes a sadness in me,
I know not what to think of't.
Ere he entered
His solitary cell, he penned a ditty,
His long and last farewell to love, and women,
So feelingly, that I confess however
It stands not with my order to be taken
With such Poetical raptures; I was moved,
And strangely with it.
Have you the copy?
Yes sir:
My Novice too can sing it, if you please
To give him hearing.
And it will come timely,
For I am full of melancholy thoughts,
Against which I have heard with reason Music
To be the speediest cure, pray you apply it.
ADieu fond love farewell you wanton powers,
I am free again;
Thou dull disease of blood and Idle hours.
Bewitching pain,
Fly to the fools that sigh away their time.
My nobler love to heaven clime,
And there behold beauty still young,
That time can ne'er corrupt, nor death destroy;
Immortal sweetness by fair Angels sung,
And honoured by eternity and joy:
There lives my love, thither my hopes aspire;
Fond love declines, this heavenly love grows higher.
How do ye approve it?
To its due desert,
It is a heavenly Hymn, no ditty father,
It passes through my ears unto my soul,
And works divinely on it; give me leave
A little to consider; shall I be
Out done in all things? nor good of my self.
Nor by example? shall my loose hopes still,
The viands of a fond affection, feed me
As I were a sensual beast, spiritual food
Refused by my sick palate? it is resolved.
How far off father, doth this new made Hermit
Make his abode?
Some two days journey son.
Having revealed my fair intentions to ye,
I hope your piety will not deny me
Your aides to further 'em?
That were against a good mans charity.
My first request is,
You would some time, for reasons I will show you,
Defer delivery of Lidians Letters
To fair Olinda.
Well sir.
For what follows,
You shall direct me; something I will do,
A new borne zeal, and friendship prompts me to. 
We have supped well friend; let our beds be ready,
We must be stirring early,
They are made sir.
I cannot sleep yet, whore's the jovial host
You told me of? 'tas been my custom ever
To parley with mine host.
He's a good fellow,
And such a one I know you love to laugh with;
Go call your Master up.
He cannot come sir.
Is he a bed with his wife?
No certainly.
Or with some other ghosts?
Neither and 't like ye.
Why then he shall come by your leave my friend,
I'll fetch him up my self.
Indeed you'll fail sir.
Is he in the house?
No, but he is hard by sir;
He is fast in's grave, he has been dead these three weeks.
Then of my conscience he will come but lamely,
And discourse worse.
Farewell mine honest Host then,
Mine honest merry Host; will you to bed yet?
No, not this hour, I prithee sit and chat by me.
Give us a quart of wine then, we'll be merry.
A match my son; pray let your wine be living,
Or lay it by your Master.
It shall be quick sir. 
Has not mine Host a wife?
A good old woman.
Another coffin, that is not so handsome;
Your Hostesses in Innes should be blithe things,
Pretty, and young to draw in passengers;
She'll never fill her beds well, if she be not beauteous.
And courteous too. 
I, I, and a good fellow,
That will mistake sometimes a Gentleman
For her good man; well done; here's to Lisander.
My full love meets it; make fire in our lodgings,
We'll trouble thee no farther; to your Son. 
Put in Clarange too; off with it, I thank ye;
This wine drinks merrier still, O for mine Host now,
Were he alive again, and well disposed,
I would so claw his pate.
You're a hard drinker.
I love to make mine Host drunk, he will lye then
The rarest, and the roundest, of his friends,
His quarrels, and his ghosts, and they are the best bawds too
Take 'em in that tune.
You know all.
I did son, but time, and arms have worn me out
It is late sir, I hear none stirring. 
Hark, what's that, a Lute?
It is at the door I think.
The doors are shut fast.
It is morning sure, the Fiddlers are got up
To fright men's sleeps, have we ne'er a piss-pot ready?
Now I remember, I have heard mine Host that's dead,
Touch a lute rarely, and as rarely sing too,
A brave still mean.
I would give a brace of French Crowns
To see him rise and Fiddle.
Tic late and cold, stir up the fire;
Sit close, and draw the Table nigher;
Be merry, and drink wine that's old,
A hearty medicine against a cold.
Your beds of want on down the best,
Where you shall tumble to your rest;
I could wish you wenches too,
But I am dead and cannot do;
Call for the best the house may ring,
Sack, White, and Claret let them bring,
And drink apace while breath you have,
You'll find but cold drink in the grave;
Plover, Patridge for your dinner,
And a Capon for the sinner,
You shall find ready when you are up,
And your horse shall have his sup:
Welcome shall fly round,
And I shall smile though under ground.
Hark, a Song, now as I live, it is his voice.
He sings well, the devil has a pleasant pipe.
The fellow lied sure, 
He is not dead, he's here: how pale he looks?
Is this he?
Yes.
You are welcome noble Gentlemen,
My brave old guest most welcome.
Lying knaves,
To tell us you were dead, come sit down by us,
We thank ye for your Song.
Would 't had been better.
Speak, are ye dead?
Yes indeed am I Gentlemen,
I have been dead these three weeks.
Then here's to ye, to comfort your cold body.
What do ye mean? stand further off.
I will stand nearer to him,
Shall he come out on's coffin to bear us company,
And we not bid him welcome? come mine Host,
Mine honest Host, here's to ye.
Spirits sir, drink not?
Why do ye appear?
To waite upon ye Gentlemen,
'Thas been my duty living, now my farewell;
I fear ye are not used accordingly.
I could wish you warmer company mine Host,
How ever we are used?
Next to entreat a curtsy,
And then I go to peace.
Is it in our power?
Yes and it is this, to see my body buried
In holy ground, for now I lye unhallowed,
By the clarks fault; let my new grave be made
Amongst good fellows, that have died before me,
And merry Hostess of my kind.
It shall be done.
And forty stoops of wine drank at thy funeral.
Do you know our travel?
Yes, to seek your friends,
That in afflictions wander now.
Alas!
Seek 'em no farther, but be confident
They shall return in peace.
There's comfort yet.
Pray ye one word more, is it in your power mine Host,
Answer me softly, some hours before my death,
To give me warning?
I cannot tell ye truly,
But if I can, so much alive I loved ye,
I will appear again, adieu. 
Adieu sir.
I am troubled; these strange apparitions are
For the most part fatal.
This if told, will not
Find credit, the light breaks a pace, let's lye down
And take some little rest, an hour or two,
Then do mine hostess desire, and so return,
I do believe him.
So do I, to rest sir. 
Clarinda?
Madam.
Is the house well ordered?
The doors looked to now in your Masters absence?
Your care, and diligence amongst the Servants?
I am stirring Madam.
So thou art Clarinda,
More then thou ought I am sure, why dost thou blush?
I do not blush.
Why dost thou hang thy head wench?
Madam, ye are deceived, I look upright,
I understand ye not: she has spied Leon, 
Shame of his want of caution.
Look on me; what, blush again?
It is more then I know Madam;
I have no cause that I find yet.
Examine then.
Your Ladyship is set I think to shame me.
Do not deserve't. who lay with you last night?
What bedfellow had ye? none of the maids came near ye.
Madam they did.
It was one in your Cousins clothes then,
And wore a sword; and sure I keep no Amazons;
Wench do not lye, twill but proclaim thee guilty;
Lies hide our sins like nets; like perspectives,
They draw offences nearer still, and greater:
Come tell the truth.
You are the strangest Lady
To have these doubts of me; how have I lived Madam?
And which of all my careful services deserves these shames?
Leave facing? twill not serve ye,
This impudence becomes thee worse then lying?
I thought ye had lived well, and I was proud of't▪
But you are pleased to abuse my thoughts; who was it?
Honest repentance yet will make the fault less.
Do ye compel me? do you stand so strict too?
Nay, then have at ye; I shall rub that sore Madam▪
(Since ye provoke me) will but vex your Ladyship;
Let me alone.
I will know.
For your own peace,
The peace of your own conscience ask no farther;
Walk in, and let me alone.
No, I will know all.
Why, then I'll tell ye, 't was a man I lay with,
Never admire, it is easy to be done, Madam,
And usual too, a proper man I lay with;
Why should you vex at that? young as Lisander,
And able too; I grudge not at your pleasure,
Why should you stir at mine? I steal none from ye,
And dost thou glory in this sin?
I am glad on it, to glory in it is for a mighty Lady That may command.
Why did thou name Lisander?
Does it anger ye? does it a little gall ye?
I know it does, why would ye urge me Lady?
Why would ye be so curious to compel me?
I named Lisander as my president,
The rule I erred by, you love him, I know it,
I grudged not at it, but am pleased it is so;
And by my care and diligence you enjoyed him.
Shall I for keeping counsel, have no comfort?
Will you have all your self? engross all pleasure?
Are ye so hard hearted? why do ye blush now Madam?
My anger blushes, not my shame base woman.
I'll make your shame blush, since you put me to it
Who lay with you t'other night?
With me? ye monstor.
Whose sweet embraces circled ye? not your husbands;
I wonder ye dare touch me in this point Madam?
Stir her against ye in whose hand your life lies?
More then your life your honour? what smug Amazon
Was that I brought you? that maid had ne'er a petticoat?
She'll half persuade me anon, I am a beast too,
And I mistrust my self, though I am honest
For giving her the Helm, thou know Clarinda,
(Even in thy conscience) I was ever virtuous;
As far from lust in meeting with Lisander
As the pure wind in welcoming the morning;
In all the conversation I had with him,
As free, and innocent, as you'd fair heaven;
Did not thou persuade me too?
Yes, I had reason for it,
And now you are persuaded I'll make use on it.
If I had sinned thus, and my youth enticed me,
The nobleness and beauty of his person,
Beside the mighty benefits I am bound to,
Is this sufficient warrant for thy weakness?
If I had been a whore, and craved thy counsel
In the conveyance of my fault, and faithfulness,
Thy secrecy, and truth in hiding of it;
Is it thy justice to repay me thus?
To be the Master sinner to compel me?
And build thy lusts security on mine honour?
They that love this sin, love their security;
Prevention Madam is the nail I knocked at,
And I have hit it home, and so I'll hold it,
And you must pardon me, and be silent too,
And suffer what ye see, and suffer patiently;
I shall do worse else.
Thou can not touch my credit,
Truth will not suffer me to be abused thus.
Do not you stick to truth, she is seldom heard Madam,
A poor weak tongue she has, and that is hoarse too
With pleading at the bars, none understands her,
Or if you had her, what can she say for ye?
Must she not swear he came at midnight to ye,
The door left open, and your husband cozened
With a feigned sickness?
But by my soul I was honest, thou know I was honest.
That's all one what I know,
What I will testify is that shall vex ye;
Trust not a guilty rage with likelihoods,
And on apparent proof, take heed of that Madam;
If you were innocent (as it may be ye are)
I do not know, I leave it to your conscience,
It were the weakest and the poorest part of ye,
Men being so wil'ing to believe the worst,
So open eyed in this age to all infamy,
To put your fame in this weak bark to the venture.
What do I suffer? O my precious honour,
Into what box of evils have I locked thee?
Yet rather then be thus outbrav'd, and by
My drudge, my footstool, one that sued to be so;
Perish both life, and honour, devil thus
I dare thy worst, defy thee, spit at thee,
And in my virtuous rage, thus trample on thee;
Awe me thy Mistress, whore, to be thy baud?
Out of my house, proclaim all that thou know,
Or malice can invent, fetch jealousy
From hell, and like a fury breath it in
The bosom of my Lord; and to thy utmost
Blast my fair fame, yet thou shalt feel with horror
To thy seared conscience, my truth is built
On such a firm base, that if ever it can
Be forced, or undermined by thy base scandals,
Heaven keeps no guard on Innocence. 
I am lost,
In my own hopes forsaken, and must fall
The greatest torment to a guilty woman
Without revenge, till I can fashion it
I must submit, at least appear as if
I did repent, and would offend no farther.
Monsieur Beronte my Lords brother is
Obliged unto me for a private favour;
It is he must mediate for me; but when time
And opportunity bids me strike, my wreak
Shall power it self on her nice chastity
Like to a torrent, deeds, not words shall speak me. 
YE are oportunely met.
Your countenance expresses hast mixed with some fear.
You'll share with me in both, as soon as you are made
Acquainted with the cause, if you love virtue,
In danger not secure; I have no time
For circumstance, instruct me if Lisander
Be in your fathers house?
Upon my knowledge he is not there.
I am glad on it.
Why good sir?
(Without offence I speak it) there's no place
In which he is more honoured, or more safe,
Then with his friend Cleander.
In your votes
I grant it true, but as it now stands with him,
I can give reason to make satisfaction
For what I speak; you cannot but remember
The ancient difference between Lisander
And Cloridon, a man in grace at Court?
I do; and the foul plot of Cloridons kinsmen
Upon Lisanders life, for a fall given to Cloridon
Before the King, as they encountered at a solemn tilting.
It is now revenged;
In brief a challenge was brought to Lisander
By one Chrysantes; and as far as valour
Would give him leave, declined by bold Lisander:
But peace refused, and braves, on braves heaped on him,
Alone he met the opposites, ending the quarrel
With both their lives.
I am truly sorry for it.
The King incensed for his favourites death,
Hath set a price upon Lisanders head,
As a reward to any man that brings it
Alive, or dead; to gain this, every where
He is pursued, and laid for, and the friendship
Between him and your noble brother known,
His house in reason cannot pass unsearched,
And that's the principal cause that drew me hither,
To hasten his remove, if he had chosen
This Castle for his sanctuary.
It was done nobly,
And you most welcome; this night pray you take
A lodging with us; and at my entreaty
Conceal this from my brother, he is grown
Exceeing sad of late; and the hard fortune
Of one he values at so high a rate,
Will much increase his melancholy.
I am tutored▪ pray you lead the way.
To serve you I will show it. 
Nothing more certain then to dye, but when
Is most uncertain: if so, every hour
We should prepare us for the journey, which
Is not to be put off. I must submit
To the divine decree, not argue it,
And cheerfully I welcome it: I have
Disposed of my estate, confessed my sins,
And have remission from my Ghostly Father,
Being at peace too here: the apparition
Proceeded not from fancy, Dorilaus
Saw it, and heard it with me, it made answer
To our demands, and promised, if it were not
Denied to him by fate, he would fore warn me
Of my approaching end, I feel no symptom
Of sickness, yet I know not how a dullness
Invades me all over. Ha? 
I come sir,
To keep my promise; and as far as spirits
Are sensible of sorrow for the living,
I grieve to be the messenger to tell you,
Ere many hours pass, you must resolve
To fill a grave.
And feast the worms?
Even so sir.
I hear it like a man.
It well becomes you, there's no evading it.
Can you discover by whose means I must dye?
That is denied me:
But my prediction is too sure; prepare
To make your peace with heaven. So farewell sir, 
I see no enemy near; and yet I tremble
Like a pale Coward: my sad doom pronounced
By this aëriall voice, as in a glass
Shows me my death in its most dreadful shape.
What rampire can my humane frailty raise
Against the assault of fate? I doe begin
To fear my self, my inward strengths forsake me,
I must call out for help. Within there? haste,
And break in to my rescue.
Rescue? where? show me your danger.
I will interpose
My loyal breast between you and all hazard.
Your brothers sword secures you.
A true friend will dye in your defence.
I thank ye,
To all my thanks. Encompassed thus with friends
How can I fear? and yet I doe, I am wounded,
Mortally wounded: nay it is within,
I am hurt in my mind: One word—
A thousand.
I shall not live to speak so many to you.
Why? what forbids you?
But even now the spirit
Of my dead Host appeared, and told me, that
This night I should be with him: did you not meet it?
It went out at that door.
A vain Chimera
Of your imagination: can you think
Mine Host would not as well have spoke to me now,
As he did in the Inn? these waking dreams
Not alone trouble you, but strike a strange
Distraction in your family: see the tears
Of my poor daughter, fair Olinda's sadness,
Your brothers and your friends grief, servants sorrow.
Good son bear up, you have many years to live
A comfort to us all: let's in to supper;
Ghosts never walk till after mid-night, if
I may believe my Grannam. We will wash
These thoughts away with wine, spite of Hobgoblins.
You reprehend me justly: gentle Madam,
And all the rest, forgive me, Isle endeavour
To be merry with you.
That's well said.
I have procured your pardon.
Once more I receive you
Into my service: but take special care
You fall no further.
Never Madam: sir,
When you shall find fit time to call me to it,
I will make good what I have said.
Till when, upon your life be silent.
We will have a health unto Lisander.
His name sir
Somewhat revives me; but his sight would cure me.
How ever let's to supper.
Would Clarange
And Lidian were here too, as they should be,
If wishes could prevail.
They are fruitless Madam. 
If that report speak truth, Clarinda is
Discharged her Ladies service, and what burden,
I then have drawn upon me is apparent,
The crop she reaped from her attendance was
Her best Revenue, and my principal means
Clarinda's bounty, though I laboured hard for it,
A younger brothers fortune: Must I now
Have sour sauce after sweet meats? and be driven
To levy half a Crown a week, besides
Clouts, soap, and candles, for my heir apparent,
If she prove, as she swears she is with child;
Such as live this way, find like me, though winching
Hath a fair face, there's a Dragon in the tail of't
That stings to the quick. I must skulk here, until
I am resolved: how my heart pants between
My hopes and fears? shoe's come; are we in the Port?
If not, let's sink together.
Things go better
Then you deserve; you carry things so openly,
I must bear every way, I am once more
In my Ladies grace.
And I in yours.
It may be; but I have sworn unto my Lady never
To sin again.
To be surprised—the sin
Is in it self excusable; to be taken
Is a crime, as the Poet writes.
You know my weakness,
And that makes you so confident. You have got
A fair sword; was it not Lisanders?
Yes wench,
And I grown valiant by the wearing of it:
It hath been the death of two. With this Lisander
Slew Cloridon, and Chrysanthes. I took it up,
Broken in the handle, but that is reformed,
And now in my possession; the late Master
Dares never come to challenge it: this sword,
And all the weapons that I have, are ever
Devoted to thy service: Shall we bill?
I am very gamesome.
I must first dispose of
The fool Malfort; he hath smoked you, and is not,
But by some new device to be kept from me:
I have it here shall fit him: you know where
You must expect me, with all possible silence
Get thither.
You will follow?
Will I live?
She that is forfeited to lust must dye,
That humour being un-fed; begone, here comes 
My champion in Armour. 
What adventure
I am bound upon I know not, but it is
My Mistress pleasure that I should appear thus.
I may perhaps be terrible to others,
But as I am, I am sure my shadow frights me,
The clashing of my Armour in my ears,
Sounds like a passing-bell; and my Buckler, puts me
In mind of a Beer; this my broad sword a pick-axe
To dig my grave: O love, abominable love,
What Monsters issue from thy dismal den,
Clarinda's placket, which I must encounter,
Or never hope to enter?
Here's a Knight errant, Monsieur Malfort.
Stand, stand, or Isle fall for ye.
Know ye not my voice?
Yes, it was at that I trembled.
But were my false friend Leon here—
Tic he.
Where? where
He is not come yet.
It is well for him,
I am so full of wrath.
Or fear—This Leon,
How here my kinsman, hath abused you grossly,
And this night vows to take me hence perforce,
And marry me to another: it was for this,
(Presuming on your love) I did entreat you
To put your armour on, that with more safety
You might defend me.
And Isle doe it bravely.
You must stand here to beat him off, and suffer
No humane thing to pass you, though it appear
In my Lords shape, or Ladies: be not cozened
With a disguise.
I have been fooled already, but now I am wise.
You must swear not to stir hence.
Upon these lips.
Nor move until I call you?
Isle grow here rather.
This nights task well ended,
I am yours to morrow. Keep sure guard. 
Adieu;
My honey-combe how sweet thou art, did not
A nest of Hornets keep it? what impossibilities
Love makes me undertake? I know my self
A natural coward, and should Leon come,
Though this were Cannon proof, I should deliver
The wench before he asked her. I hear some footing:
It is he; where shall I hide my self? that is
My best defence.
I cannot sleep, strange visions
Make this poor life, I feared of late to lose,
A toy that I grow weary of.
It is Leon.
What's that?
If you are come sir for Clarinda;
I am glad I have her for you; I resign
My interest; you'll find her in her chamber,
I did stay up to tell you so.
Clarinda, and Leon!
There is something more in this
Then I can stay to ask. 
What a cold pickle,
(And that none of the sweetest) doe I find
My poor self in?
speaks within. Yield villain.
It is my Lord,
Shift for your self.
His life
Shall first make answer 
For this intrusion.
I am going away,
I am gone already. 
Heaven take mercy on
My soul; too true presaging Host.
Hoe's dead,
And this wretch little better:
Doe you stare upon your
Handy-work?
I am amazed.
Get o'er the garden Wall, fly for your life,
But leave your sword behind; enquire not why:
Isle fashion something out of it, though I perish,
Shall make way for revenge.
These are the fruits
Of lust Clarinda.
Hence repenting Milk-sop. 
Now it is too late. Lisanders sword, I that, 
That is the base Isle build on. So. Isle raise
The house. Help, murder, a most horrid
Murder. Monsieur Beronte, noble Dorilaus,
All buried in sleep? Aye me a murder:
A most unheard-of murder.
More lights knaves;
Beronte, Alcidon; more lights.
By this I see too much.
My son Cleander bathing
In his own gore. The devil to tell truth in the shape of
An Host!
My Brother?
I have been
Ith'other world, in hell I think, these devils
With fire-brands in their paws sent to torment me,
Though I never did the deed, for my lewd purpose
To be a whore-master.
Who's that?
It is one in Armour. A bloody sword in his hand.
Sans question the murderer.
Who I? you doe me wrong,
I never had the heart to kill a Chicken;
Nor doe I know this sword.
I doe, too well.
I have seen Lisander wear it.
This confirms
What yesternight I whispered: let it work,
The circumstance may make it good.
My Lord? and I his murderer?
Drag the villain hence,
The Rack shall force a free confession from him.
I am struck dumb;
You need not stop my mouth.
Away with him. 
Where is my Lord?
All that
Remains of him lies there: look on this object,
And then turn marble.
I am so already,
Made fit to be his monument: but wherefore
Doe you, that have both life and motion left you,
Stand sad spectators of his death,
And not bring forth his murderer?
That lies in you: you must, and shall produce him.
She Beronte?
None else.
Thou lie, Isle prove it on thy head,
Or write it on thy heart.
Forbear, there is
Too much blood shed already,
Let not choler
Stifle your judgement: many an honest father
Hath got a wicked daughter. If I prove not
With evident proofs, her hand was in the blood
Of my dear brother, (too good a husband for her)
Give your revenge the reins, and spur it forward.
In any circumstance but show her guilty,
Isle strike the first stroke at her.
Let me ask
A question calmly: doe you know this sword?
Have you not seen Lisander often wear it.
The same with which he rescued me.
I do, What inference from this to make me guilty?
Was he not with you in the house to night?
No on my soul.
Nor ever heretofore
In private with you, when you feigned a sickness,
To keep your husband absent?
Never sir, to a dishonest end.
Was not this woman
Your instrument? her silence does confess it:
Here lies Cleander dead, and here the sword
Of false Lisander, too long covered with
A masque of seeming truth.
And is this all
The proof you can allege? Lisander guilty,
Or my poor daughter an adulteress?
Suppose that she had changed discourse with one
To whom she owed much more?
Thou hast thy ends, wicked Clarinda. 
Help, the Lady sinks, malice hath killed her.
I would have her live,
Since I dare swear shoe's innocent: it is no time
Or place to argue now: this cause must be
Decided by the Judge; and though a Father,
I will deliver her into the hands
Of Justice. If she prove true gold when tried,
Shoe's mine: if not, with curses Isle disclaim her:
Take up your part of sorrow, mine shall be
Ready to answer with her life the fact
That she is charged with.
Sir, I look upon you as on a father.
With the eyes of sorrow
I see you as a brother: let your witnesses
Be ready.
It is my care.
I am for Lidian.
This accident no doubt will draw him from
His Hermits life.
Things yet go right, persist sir. 
Are the horses dead?
Out-right. If you ride at this rate,
You must resolve to kill your two a day,
And that's a large proportion.
Will you please
At any price, and speedily, to get fresh ones.
You know my danger, and the penalty
That follows it, should I be apprehended.
Your duty in obeying my commands,
Will in a better language speak your service,
Then your unnecessary, and untimely care of my expense.
I am gone sir. 
In this thicket
I will expect you: Here yet I have leisure
To call my self to a strict account
For my passed life, how vainly spent: I would
I stood no farther guilty: but I have
A heavier reckoning to make: This hand
Of late as white as innocence, and unspotted,
Now wears a purple colour, died in gore,
My soul of the same tincture; pur-blinde passion,
With flattering hopes, would keep me from despair,
Pleading I was provoked to it; but my reason
Breaking such thin and weak defences, tells me
I have done a double murder; and for what?
Was it in service of the King? his Edicts
Command the contrary: or for my Country?
Her Genius, like a mourning mother, answers
In Cloridon and Chrysanthes she hath lost
Two hopeful sons, that might have done their parts,
To guard her from Invasion: for what cause then?
To keep th'opinion of my valour upright,
In the popular breath, a fandy ground to build on;
Bought with the Kings displeasure, as the breac
Of heavens decrees, the loss of my true comforts,
In Parents, Kinsmen, friends, as the fruition
Of all that I was borne to, and that sits
Like to a hill of Lead here, in my exile,
(Never to be repealed, if I escape so)
I have cut off all hopes ever to look on
Divine Caliste, from her fight, and converse,
For ever banished.
I should know this voice,
His naming too my sister, whom Lisander
Honoured, but in a noble way, assures me
That it can be no other: I stand bound
To comfort any man I find distressed:
But to aid him that saved my life, Religion
And Thankfulness commands, and it may be
High providence for this good end hath brought him
Into my solitary walk. Lisander, noble Lisander.
Whatsoever thou art,
That honourable attribute thou give me,
I can pretend no right to: come not near me,
I am infectious, the sanctity
Of thy profession (for thou appear
A reverend Hermit) if thou fly not from me,
As from the plague or leprosy, cannot keep thee
From being polluted.
With good counsel sir,
And holy prayers to boot I may cure you,
Though both ways so infected. You look wildly,
Peace to your conscience sir, and stare upon me,
As if you never saw me: hath my habit
Altered my face so much, that yet you know not
Your servant Lidian?
I am amazed!
So young, and so religious?
I purpose (heaven make me thankful for it) to leave the world:
I have made some trial of my strengths in this
My solitary life; and yet I find not
A faintness to go on.
Above belief: doe you inhabit here?
Mine own free choice sir:
I live here poorly, but contentedly,
Because I find enough to feed my fortunes;
Indeed too much: these wilde fields are my gardens,
The Crystal Rivers they afford their waters,
And grudge not their sweet streams to quench afflictions;
The hollow rocks their beds, which though they are hard,
(The Emblems of a doting lovers fortune)
Yet they are quiet; and the weary slumbers
The eyes catch there, softer then beds of Down friend;
The Birds my Bell to call me to devotions;
My Book the story of my wandering life,
In which I find more hours due to repentance
Then time hath told me yet.
Answer me truly.
I will doe that without a conjuration.
In the depth of meditation doe you not
Sometimes think of Olinda?
I endeavour
To raze her from my memory, as I wish
You would doe the whole Sex, for know Lisander,
The greatest curse brave man can labour under,
Is the strong witch-craft of a women's eyes;
Where I find men I preach this doctrine to 'em:
As you are a Scholar, knowledge make your Mistress,
The hidden beauties of the heavens your study;
There shall you find fit wonder for your faith,
And for your eye in immitable objects:
As you are a professed soldier, court your honour,
Though she be sterne, she is honest, a brave Mistress;
The greater danger you oppose to win her,
She shows the sweeter, and rewards the nobler;
Women's best loves to hers mere shadows be,
For after death she weds your memory.
These are my contemplations.
Heavenly ones;
And in a young man more remarkable.
But wherefore doe I envy, and not tread in
This blessed tract? here's in the heart no falsehood
To a vowed friend, no quarrels seconded
With Challenges, which answered in defence
Of the word Reputation, murder follows.
A man may here repent his sins, and though
His hand like mine be stained in blood, it may be
With penitence and true contrition washed off;
You have proved it Lidian.
And you'll find it true, if you persevere.
Here then ends my flight,
And here the fury of the King shall find me
Prepared for heaven, if I am marked to dye;
For that I truly grieve for.
Keep your self concealed, I am instructed.
How the sight
Of my dear friend confirms me?
What are these?
Two reverend Friars, one I know.
To you
This journey is devoted.
Welcome Father.
I know your resolution so well grounded,
And your adieu unto the world so constant,
That though I am th'unwilling messenger
Of a strange accident to try your temper,
It cannot shake you. You had once a friend,
A noble friend, Clarange.
And have still, I hope good father.
Your false hopes deceive you,
Hoe's dead.
Clarange dead?
I buried him.
Some said he died of melancholy, some of love,
And of that fondness perished.
O Clarange.
Hast thou so much brave nature, noble Lidian,
So tenderly to love thy rivals memory?
The bold Lisander weeps too.
I expected that you would bear this better.
I am a man sir, and my great loss weighed duly—
His last words were
After Confession, live long dear Lidian,
Possessed of all thy wishes; and of me
He did desire, bathing my hand with tears,
That with my best care, I should seek and find you.
And from his dying mouth prevail so with you,
That you a while should leave your Hermits strictness,
And on his monument pay a tear, or two,
To witness how you loved him.
O my heart! to witness how I loved him? would he had not
Lead me unto his grave, but sacrificed
His sorrows upon mine, he was my friend,
My noble friend, I will bewail his ashes,
His fortunes and poor mine were born together,
And I will weep 'em both: I will kneel by him,
And on his hallowed earth doe my last duties.
Isle gather all the pride of spring to deck him,
Woodbines shall grow upon his honoured grave;
And as they prosper clasp to show our friendship,
And when they wither Isle die too.
Who would not
Desire to dye, to be bewaild thus nobly?
There is a Legacy he hath bequeathed you;
But of what value I must not discover,
Until those Rites and pious Ceremonies
Are duly tendered.
I am too full of sorrow to be inquisitive
To think of his
I doe forget mine own woes.
Graze thy fill, now
Thou hast done thy business; ha? who have we here?
Lisander, Lidian? and two reverend Friars?
What a strange Scene of sorrow is expressed
In different postures, in their looks and station?
A common Painter eyeing these, to help
His dull invention, might draw to the life
The living sons of Priam, as they stood
On the pale walls of Troy, when Hector fell
Under Achilles Spear: I come too late,
My horse, though good and strong, moved like a Tortoise:
Ill news had wings, and hath got here before me.
All Pythagoreans? not a word?
O Alcidon—
Deep rivers with soft murmurs glide along
The shallow roar: Clarange!
Cloridon? Chrysanthes? spare my grief, and apprehend
What I should speak.
Their fates I have long since
For your sake mourned; Clarange's death, for so
Your silence doth confirm, till now I heard not:
Are these the bounds that are prescribed unto
The swelling seas of sorrow?
The bounds Alcidon?
Can all the winds of mischief from all quarters,
Euphrates, Ganges, Tigris, Volga, Po,
Paying at once their tribute to this Ocean,
Make it swell higher? I am a murderer,
Banished, proscribed, is there ought else that can
Be added to it?
I have lost a friend,
Prized dearer then my being, and he dead
My misery's at the height contemn the worst
Of fortunes malice.
How our humane weakness,
Grown desperate from small disasters makes us
Imagine them a period to our sorrows,
When the first syllable of greater woes
Is not yet written.
How?
Speak it at large,
Since grief must break my heart, I am ambitious
It should be exquisite.
It must be told,
Yet ever you hear it, with all care put on
The surest Armour anviled in the shop
Of passive fortitude; the good Cleander
Your friend is murdered.
It is a terrible pang,
And yet it will not doe, I live yet, act not
The tortrers part; if that there be a blow
Beyond this, give it, and at once dispatch me.
Your sword dyed in his heart blood was found near him
Your private conference at mid-night urged
With fair Caliste; which by her whose pure truth
Would never learn to tell a lie, being granted,
She by enraged Beronte is accused
Of murder and adultery, and you
(However I dare swear it false) concluded
Her principal agent.
Wave upon wave rolls o'er me.
My sister? my dear sister?
Hold great heart.
Tear open his Doublet.
Is this wound too narrow
For my life to get out at? Bring me to
A Cannon loaded, and some pitying friend
Give fire unto it, while I nail my breast
Unto his thundering mouth, that in the instant,
I may be peece-meale torn, and blown so far,
As not one joint of my dismembered limbs
May ever be by search of man found out.
Cleander! Yet why name I him? however
His fall deserved an earth-quake, if compared
With what true honour in Caliste suffers,
Is of no moment; my good Angel keep me
From blasphemy, and strike me dumb before
In the agony of my spirit, I doe accuse
The powers above, for their unjust permission
Of virtue, innocent virtue, to be branded
With the least vicious mark.
I never saw a man so far transported.
Give it way, it is now no time to stop it.
Sir, I have bought 
Fresh horses; and as you respect your life
Speedily back 'em; the Archers of the Kings guard,
Are every where in quest of you.
My life?
Perish all such with thee that wish it longer 
Let it but clear Caliste's innocence,
And Nestors age to mine was youth, Isle fly
To meet the rage of my incensed King,
And wish his favourites ghost appeared in flames,
To urge him to revenge, let all the tortures
That tyranny ever found out circle me,
Provided justice set Caliste free. 
Isle follow him.
I am rooted here
Remember your dear friends last request, your sisters dangers,
With the aides that you may lend her.
Pray you support me,
My legs deny their office.
I grow still
Farther engaged unto his matchless virtues,
And I am dead indeed, until I pay
The debt I owe him in a noble way. 
THou hast him safe?
As fast as locks can make him:
He must break through three doors, and cut the throats
Of ten tall fellows, if that hee scope us:
Besides, as far as I can apprehend,
He hath no such invention, for his looks
Are full of penitence.
Trust not a knaves looks,
They are like a whores oaths;
How does my poor daughter
Brook her restraint?
With such a resolution
As well becomes your Lordships child. 
Who's that?
Monsieur Lemur. 
This is a special favour,
And may stand an example in the court
For curtsy: It is the Clients duty
To wait upon his patron; you prevent me,
That am your humble suitor.
My near place
About the King, though it swell others, cannot
Make me forget your worth and age, which may
Challenge much more respect; and I am sorry
That my endeavours for you have not met with
The good success I wished; I moved the King
With my best advantage both of time and place,
In the favour of your daughter.
How doe you find his Majesty affected?
Not to be
Swayed from the rigour of the Law: yet so far
The rarity of the cause hath won upon him,
That he resolves to have in his own person
The hearing of it; her trial will be noble,
And to my utmost strength, where I may serve her,
My aids shall not be wanting.
I am your servant.
One word more: if you love Lisanders life,
Advise him as he tenders it to keep
Out of the way: if he be apprehended,
This City cannot ransom him; so good morrow. 
All happiness attend you: go thy ways,
Thou hast a clear and noble soul: for thy sake
Isle hold that man mine enemy, who dares mutter,
The court is not the sphere where virtue moves 
Humanity and nobleness waiting on her
Two gentlemen (but what they are I know not,
Their faces are so musl'd) press to see you,
And will not be denied.
What ere they are, I am to old to fear.
They need no usher, they make their own way.
Take you yours. Lisander! 
My Joy to see you, and my sorrow for
The danger you are in, contend so here,
Though different passions, nay opposed in nature,
I know not which to entertain.
Your hate should win the victory from both, with justice,
You may look on me as a Homicide,
A man whose life is forfeited to the Law,
But if (how ere I stand accused) in thought
I sinned against Cleanders life, or live
Guilty of the dishonour of your daughter,
May all the miseries that can fall on man
Here, or hereafter circle me.
To me this protestation's useless, I embrace you,
As the preserver of my life, the man
To whom my son owes his, with life, his honour,
And howsoever your affection
To my unhappy daughter, though it were
(For I have sifted her) in a noble way,
Hath printed some taint on her fame, and brought
Her life in question, yet I would not purchase
The wished recovery of her reputation,
With strong assurance of her innocence
Before the King her Judge, with certain loss
Of my Lisander, for whose life, if found,
There's no redemption; my excess of love,
(Though to enjoy you one short day would lengthen
My life a dozen years) boldly commands me,
Upon my knees, which yet were never bent,
But to the King and heaven, to entreat you
To fly hence with all possible speed, and leave
Caliste to her fortune.
O blessed Saints, forsake her in afflictiction? can you
Be so unnatural to your own blood,
To one so well deserving, as to value
My safety before hers? shall innocence
In her be branded, and my guilt escape
Unpunished? doe's she suffer so much for me,
For me unworthy, and shall I decline
(Eating the bitter bread of banishment)
The course of justice to draw out a life?
(A life? I stile it false, a living death)
Which being uncompelled laid down will clear her,
And write her name anew in the fair legend
Of the best women? seek not to dissuade me.
I will not, like a careless Poet, spoil
The last act of my Play, till now applauded,
By giving the world just cause to say I feared
Death more then loss of honour,
But suppose heaven hath designed some
Other saving means for her deliverance?
Other means? that is
A mischief above all I have groaned under:
Shall any other pay my debt, while I
Write my self bankrupt? or Caliste owe
The least beholdingness for that which she
On all the bonds of gratitude I have sealed to,
May challenge from me to be freely tendered?
Avert it mercy! I will go to my grave,
Without the curses of my creditors;
Isle vindicate her fair name, and so cancel
My obligation to her, to the King,
To whom I stand accountable for the loss
Of two of his loved subjects lives, Isle offer
Mine own in satisfaction, to heaven
Isle pay my true repentance, to the times
Present, and future, Isle be registered
A memorable president to admonish
Others, however valiant, not to trust
To their abilities to dare, and doe,
And much less for the aërie words of honour,
And false stamped reputation to shake off
The chains of their religion, and allegiance,
The principal means appointed to prefer
Societies and Kingdoms. 
Let's not leave him; his mind's much troubled.
Were your daughter free,
Since from her dangers his distraction rises
His cause is not so desperate for the slaughter
Of Cloridon and Chrysanthes, but it may
Find passage to the mercy of the King,
The motives urged in his defence, that forced him
To act that bloody Scene.
Heaven can send aids,
When they are least expected, let us walk,
The hour of trial draws near.
May it end well. 
That for my love you should turn Hermit Lidian,
As much amazes me, as your report Clarange's dead.
He is so, and all comforts
My youth can hope for, Madam, with him buried;
Nor had I ever left my cell, but that
He did enjoin me at his death to shed
Some tears of friendship on his Monument,
And those last Rites performed, he did bequeath you
As the best legacy a friend could give,
Or I indeed could wish to my embraces.
It is still more strange, is there no foul play in it?
I must confess I am not sorry sir
For your fair fortune; yet it is fit I grieve
The most untimely death of such a Gentleman,
He was my worthy servant.
And for this acknowledgment, if I could prize you at
A higher rate I should, he was my friend:
My dearest friend.
But how should I be assured sir
(For slow belief is the best friend of truth)
Of this Gentleman's death? if I should credit it,
And afterword it fall out contrary,
How am I shamed? how is your virtue tainted?
There is a Friar that came along with me.
His business to deliver you a Letter
From dead Clarange: You shall hear his testimony.
Father, my reverend Father, look upon him,
Such holy men are Authors of no Fables.
They should not be, their lives and their opinions,
Like brightest purest flames should still burn upwards,
To me sir? 
If you are the fair Olinda—
I doe not like these cross points.
Give me leave, I am nearest to my self. What I have plotted
Shall be pursued: you must not over-rule me.
Doe you put the first hand to your own undoing?
Play to betray your game? Mark but this letter.
Lady I am come to claim your noble promise, 
If you be Mistress of your word, ye are mine,
I am last returned: your riddle is dissolved,
And I attend your faith. Your humble servant Clarange.
Is this the Friar that saw him dead?
It is he.
Clarange on my life: I am defeated:
Such reverend habits juggle? my true sorrow
For a false friend not worth a tear derided?
You have abused my trust.
It is not well, nor like a gentleman.
All stratagems
In love, and that the sharpest war, are lawful,
By your example I did change my habit,
Caught you in your own toil, and triumph in it,
And what by policy's got, I will maintain
With valour; no Lisander shall come in again to fetch you off.
His honoured name
Pronounced by such a treacherous tongue is tainted,
Maintain thy treason with thy sword? With what
Contempt I hear it; in a Wilderness
I durst encounter it, and would, but that
In my retired hours, not counterfeited
As thy religious shape was, I have learned
When Justice may determine such a cause,
And of such weight as this fair Lady is,
Must not be put to fortune, I appeal
Unto the King, and he whose wisdom knows
To doe his subjects right in their estates,
As graciously with judgement will determine
In points of honour.
I'll steer the same course with you.
I'll stand the trial.
What have you done? or what intend you?
Ask not; I'll come off with honour. 
Be constant in your proofs: should you shrink back now,
Your life must answer it, nor am I safe,
My honour being engaged to make that good
Which you affirm.
I am confident, so dearly
I honoured my dead Lord, that no respect,
Or of my Ladies bounties (which were great ones
I must confess) nor of her former life,
For while that she was chaste, indeed I loved her,
Shall hinder me from lending my assistance
Unto your just revenge — mine own I mean, 
If Leon keep far off enough, ell's secure:
Lisander dares not come in, modest blushes
Parted with me long since, and impudence
Armed with my hate, unto her innocence shall be
The weapon I will fight with now
The rack
Being presented to you, you'll roar out
What you conceal yet,
Conceal? I know nothing
But that I shall be hanged, and that I look for,
It is my destiny, I ever had
A hanging look; and a wise woman told me,
Though I had not the heart to do a deed
Worthy the halter, in my youth or age,
I should take a turn with a wry mouth and now
It is come about: I have penned mine own ballad
Before my condemnation, in fear
Some rimer should prevent me: here's my Lady?
Would I were in heaven, or a thousand miles hence,
That I might not blush to look on her.
You behold this preparation, and the enemies
Who are to fight against your life, yet if
You bring no witness here, that may convince ye
Of breach of faith to your Lords bed, and hold up
Unspotted hands before the King, this trial
You are to undergo, will but refine,
And not consume your honour.
How confirmed
I am here, whatsoever Fate falls on me,
You shall have ample testimony; till the death
Of my dear Lord, to whose sad memory
I pay a mourning widows tears, I lived
Too happy in my holy-day trim of glory,
And courted with felicity, that drew on me,
With other helps of nature, as of fortune,
The envy, not the love of most that knew me,
This made me to presume too much, perhaps
Too proud; but I am humbled; and if now
I doe make it apparent, I can bear
Adversity with such a constant patience
As will set off my innocence, I hope sir,
In your declining age, when I should live
A comfort to you, you shall have no cause,
How ever I stand accused, to hold your honour
Ship-wrack'd in such a daughter.
O best friend, my honour's at the stake too, for—
Be silent; the King.
Sir, if you please to look upon
The Prisoner, and the many services
Her Father hath done for you—
We must look on
The cause, and not the persons. Yet beholding
With an impartial eye, the excelling beauties
Of this fair Lady, which we did believe
Upon report, but till now never saw 'em,
It moves a strange kind of compassion in me;
Let us survey you nearer, shoe's a book
To be with care perused; and tic my wonder,
If such misshapen ghosts, as lust and murder,
At any price should ever find a lodging
In such a beauteous Inn! mistake us not,
Though we admire the outward structure, if
The rooms be foul within, expect no favour.
I were no man, if I could look on beauty
Distressed, without some pity; but no King,
If any superficial gloss of feature
Could work me to decline the course of Justice.
But to the cause, Cleander's death, what proofs
Can you produce against her?
Royal sir, touching that point my brothers death,
We build on suppositions.
Suppositions? how? Is such a Lady sir to bee condemned
On suppositions?
They are well grounded sir:
And if we make it evident she is guilty
Of the first crime we charge her with, Adultery,
That being the parent, it may find belief,
That murder was the issue.
We allow
It may be so; but that it may be, must not
Infer a necessary consequence
To cast away a Ladies life. What witnesses
To make this good?
The principal, this woman,
For many years her servant; she hath taken
Her oath in Court. Come forward.
By my Crown a lying face.
I swore sir for the King:
And if you are the party, as I doe
Believe you are, for you have a good face,
How ever mine appears, swearing for you sir,
I ought to have my oath pass.
Impudent too? well, what have you sworn?
That this Lady was
A goodly tempting Lady, as she is:
How thinks your Majesty? and I her servant,
Her officer as one would say, and trusted
With her closest Chamber-service; that Lisander
Was a fine timbered gentleman, and active,
That he could doe fine gambols
To make a Lady merry; that this pair,
A very loving couple, mutually
Affected one another: so much for them sir.
That I, a simple waiting-woman, having taken
My bodily oath, the first night of admittance
Into her Ladyships service, on her slippers,
(That was the book) to serve her will in all things,
And to know no Religion but her pleasure,
It is not yet out of fashion with some Ladies;
That I, as the premises show, being commanded
To doe my function, in conveyance of
Lisander to her chamber, (my Lord absent,
On a pretended sickness) did the feat,
(It cannot be denied) and at dead mid-night
Left 'em together: what they did, some here
Can easily imagine? I have said, sir.
The devils Oratrix.
Then you confess you were her Bawd?
That's course, her agent sir.
So goodie agent? and you think there is
No punishment due for your agentship?
Let her suffer first,
Being my better, for adultery,
And Isle endure the Mulct imposed on Bawds,
Call it by the worst name.
Live I to hear this?
Take her aside. Your answer to this Lady?
Heaven grant me patience: to be thus confronted,
(O pardon Royal sir a women's passion)
By one, and this the worst of my mis-fortunes,
That was my slave, but never to such ends sir,
Would give a statue motion into fury:
Let my passed life, my actions, nay intentions,
Be by my grand accuser justly censured,
(For her I scorn to answer) and if they
Yield any probability of truth
In that she urges, and I will confess
A guilty cause; the peoples voice, which is
The voice of truth, my husbands tenderness
In his affection to me, that no dotage
But a reward of humbleness, the friendship
Echoed through France between him and Lisander,
All make against her; for him, in his absence,
(What ever imputation it draw on me)
I must take leave to speak: it is true, he loved me,
But not in such a wanton way, his reason
Mastered his passions: I grant I had
At mid-night conference with him; but if he
Ever received a farther favour from me,
Then what a sister might give to a brother,
May I sink quick: and thus much, did he know
The shame I suffer for him, with the loss
Of his life for appearing, on my soul
He would maintain. 
And will, thou clear example of women's pureness.
Though we hold her such,
Thou hast expressed thy self a desperate fool,
To thrust thy head into the Lions jaws,
The justice of thy King.
I came prepared for it,
And offer up a guilty life to clear
His innocence; the oath she took, I swear to;
And for Cleanders death, to purge my self
From any colour malice can paint on me,
Or that she had a hand in it, I can prove
That fatal night when he in his own house fell,
And many days before, I was distant from it
A long days journey.
I am caught.
If so,
How came your Sword into this stewards hands? stand forth.
I have heard nothing that you spake;
I know I must dye, and what kind of death
Pray you resolve me, I shall go away else
In a qualm; I am very faint.
Carry him off, his fear will kill him. 
Sir, it was my ambition,
My Daughters reputation being wounded
In the general opinion, to have it
Cured by a public trial; I had else
Forborne your Majesties trouble: I'll bring forth
Cleanders murderer, in a wood I heard him
As I rod sadly by, unto himself
With some compunction, though this devil had none,
Lament what he had done, cursing her lust,
That drew him to that bloody fact.
To lessen
The foulness of it, for which I know justly
I am to suffer, and with my last breath
To free these Innocents, I do confess all;
This wicked woman only guilty with me.
Is it come to this? thou puling Rogue, dye thou
With prayers in thy mouth; I'll curse the laws
By which I suffer, all I grieve for is,
That I dye unrevenged.
But one word mote sir,
And I have done; I was by accident where
Lisander met with Cloridon, and Crysanthes,
Was an ear witness when he sought for peace,
Nay, begged it upon colder terms then can
Almost find credit, his past deeds considered,
But they deaf to his reasons, severally
Assaulted him, but such was his good fortune,
That both fell under it; upon my death
I take it uncompel'd, that they were guilty
Of their own violent ends; and he against
His will, the Instrument.
This I will swear too, for I was not far off.
They have alleged
As much to wake your sleeping mercy sir,
As all the Advocates of France can plead
In his defence.
The criminal judge shall sentence
These to their merits—with mine own hand Lady
I take you from the bar, and do my self
Pronounce you innocent. 
Long live the King.
And to confirm you stand high in our favour,
And as some recompense for what you have
With too much rigour in your trial suffered;
Ask what you please, becoming me to grant,
And be possessed of't.
Sir, I dare not doubt
Your royal promise, in a King it is
A strong assurance, that emboldens me
Upon my humble knees to make my boon
Lisanders pardon.
My good Genius did prompt her to it.
At your feet thus prostrate, I second her petition.
Never King
Powered forth his meocie on a worthier subject.
To witness my repentance for the wrong
In my unjust suspicion I did both;
I join in the same suit.
The life you give,
Still ready to lay down for your service.
Shall be against your enemies employed,
Not hazarded in brawls.
Mercy dread sir.
So many pressing me, and with such reasons
Moving compassion, I hope it will not
Be censured levity in me though I borrow
In this from justice to relieve my mercy;
I grant his pardon at your intercession,
But still on this condition; you Lisander,
In expiation of your guilt, shall build
A monument for my Cloridon, and Crysanthes:
And never henceforth draw a Sword, but when
By us you are commanded, in defence of
The Flower de Luce and after one years sorrow
For your dear friend, Cleanders wretched fate,
Marry Caliste. 
On your sacred hand, I vow to do it seriously.
Great sir stay,
Leave not your seat of justice, till you have
Given sentence in a cause as much important
As this you have determined.
Lidian? 
He sir, your humbled subject, I accuse Clarange
Of falsehood in true friendship at the height;
We both were suitors to this Lady, both
Enjoined one penance.
Trouble not the King
With an unnecessary repetition
Of what the Court's familiar with already.
Clarange?
With a shaven crown?
Most strange,
Look on thy rival, your late servant Madam,
But now devoted to a better Mistress,
The Church, whose orders I have took upon me:
I here deliver up my interest to her;
And what was got with cunning as you thought,
I simply thus surrender: heretofore,
You did outstrip me in the race of friendship,
I am your equal now.
A suite soon ended.
And joining thus your hands, I know both willing,
I may do in the Church my Friars Office
In marrying you.
The victory is yours sir.
It is a glorious one, and well set's of
Our Scene of mercy; to the dead we tender
Our sorrow, to the living ample wishes
Of future happiness: it is a Kings duty
To prove himself a father to his Subjects:
And I shall hold it if this well succeed,
A meritorious, and praise worthy deed. 
A Story, and a known one, long since writ,
Truth must take place, and by an able wit,
Foul mouthed detraction daring not deny
To give so much to Fletchers memory;
If so, some may object, why then do you
Present an old piece to us for a new?
Or wherefore will your professed writer be
(Not taxed of theft before) a Plagary?
To this he answers in his just defence,
And to maintain to all our Innocence,
Thus much, though he hath travelled the same way,
Demanding, and receiving too the pay
For a new Poem, you may find it due,
He having neither cheated us, nor you;
He vows, and deeply, that he did not spare
The utmost of his strengths, and his best care
In the reviving it, and though his powers
Could not as he desired, in three short hours
Contract the Subject, and much less express
The changes, and the various passages
That will he looked for, you may hear this day
Some Scaenes that will confirm it is a play,
He being ambitious that it should be known
What's good was Fletchers, and what ill his own.
STill doubtful, and perplexed too, whether he
Hath done Fletcher right in this History,
The Poet sits within, since he must known it,
He with respect, desires that you would show it
By some accustomed sign, if from our action,
Or his endeavours you meet satisfaction,
With ours he hath his ends, we hope the best,
To make that certainty in you doth rest.

