I Come no more to make you laugh, Things now,
That bear a Weighty, and a Serious Brow,
Sad, high, and working, full of State and Woe:
Such Noble Scoenes, as draw the Eye to flow
We now present. Those that can Pity, here
May (if they think it well) let fall a Tear,
The Subject will deserve it. Such as give
Their Money out of hope they may believe,
May here find Truth too. Those that come to see
Only a show or two, and so agree,
The Play may pass: If they be still, and willing,
Isle undertake may see away their shilling
Richly in two short hours. Only they
That come to hear a Merry, Bawdy Play,
A noise of Targets: Or to see a Fellow
In a long Motley Coat, guarded with Yellow,
Will be deceived. For gentle Hearers, know
To rank our chosen Truth with such a show
As Fool, and Fight is, beside forfe•ting
Our own Brains, and the Opinion that we bring
To make that only true, we now intend,
Will leave vs never an understanding Friend.
Therefore, for Goodness sake, and as you are known
The First and Happiest Hearers of the Town,
Be sad, as we would make ye. Th•nkeye see
The very Persons of our Noble Story,
As they were Living: Think you see them Great,
And followed with the general throng, and sweat
Of thousand Friends: Then, in a moment, see
How soon this Mightiness, meets Misery:
And if you can be merry then, Isle say,
A Man may weep upon his Wedding day.
GOod morrow, and well met. How have ye done
Since last we saw in France?
I thank your Grace:
Healthful, and ever since a fresh Admirer
Of what I saw there.
An untimely Ague
Staid me a Prisoner in my Chamber, when
Those Suns of Glory, those two Lights of Men
Met in the vale of Andren.
Twixt Guineas and Arde,
I was then present, saw them salute on Horseback,
Beheld them when they lighted, how they clung
In their Embrace, as they grew together,
Which had they▪
What four Throned ones could have weighed
Such a compounded one?
All the whole time
I was my Chambers Prisoner.
Then you lost
The view of earthly glory: Men might say
Till this time Pomp was single, but now married
To one aboue it self. Each following day
Became the next days master, till the last
Made former Wonders, it's. To day the French,
All Clinquant all in Gold, like Heathen Gods
Shone down the English; and to morrow, they
Made Britain, India: Every man that stood,
Show•d like a Mine▪ Their Dwarfish Pages were
As Cherubins, all gilt: the Madams too,
Not used to toil, did almost sweat to bear
The Pride upon them, that their very labour
Was to them, as a Painting. Now this Mask
Was cried incompareable; and the ensuing night
Made it a Fool, and Beggar. The two Kings
Equal in lustre, were now best, now worst
As presence did present them: Him in eye,
Still him in praise, and being present both,
It was said they saw but one, and no Discerner
Durst wag his Tongue in censure, when these Suns
(For so they phrase 'em) by their Heralds challenged
The Noble Spirits to Arms, they did perform
Beyond thoughts Compass, that former fabulous Story
Being now seen, possible enough, got credit
That Beuis was believed.
Oh you go far.
As I belong to worship, and affect
In Honour, Honesty, the tract of every thing,
Would by a good Discourser loose some life,
Which Actions self, was tongue too.
All was Royal,
To the disposing of it nought rebelled,
Order gave each thing view. The Office did
Distinctly his full Function: who did guide,
I mean who set the Body, and the Limbs
Of this great Sport together?
As you guess:
One certes, that promises no Element
In such a business.
I pray you who, my Lord?
All this was ordered by the good Discretion
Of the right Reverend Cardinal of York.
The devil speed him: No mans Pie is freed
From his Ambitious finger. What had he
To do in these fierce Vanities? I wonder,
That such a Keech can with his very bulk
Take up the Rays of the beneficial Sun,
And keep it from the Earth.
Surely Sir,
There's in him stuff, that putt's him to these ends:
For being not propped by Ancestry, whose grace
Chalks Successors their way; nor called upon
For high feats done to the Crown; neither Allied
To eminent Assistants; but Spider-like
Out of his Selfe-drawing Web. O gives vs note,
The force of his own merit makes his way
A gift that heaven gives for him, which buys
A place next to the King.
I cannot tell
What Heaven hath given him: let some Graver eye
Pierce into that, but I can see his Pride
Peep through each part of him: whence he's he that,
If not from Hell? The Devil is a Niggard,
Or he's given all before, and he begins
A new Hell in himself.
Why the Devil,
Upon this French going out, took he upon him
(Without the privity of the King) t'appoint
Who should attend on him? He makes up the File
Of all the Gentry; for the most part such
To whom as great a Charge, as little Honour
He meant to lay upon: and his own Letter
The Honourable Board of Council, out
Must fetch him in, he Papers.
I do know
Kinsmen of mine, three at the least, that have
By this, so sickened their Estates, that never
They shall abound as formerly.
O many
Have broke their backs with laying Manors on 'em
For this great Journey. What did this vanity
But minister communication of
A most poor issue.
Greeuingly I think,
The Peace between the French and vs, not valewes
The Cost that did conclude it.
Every man,
After the hideous storm that followed, was
A thing Inspired, and not consulting, broke
Into a general Prophecy; That this Tempest
Dashing the Garment of this Peace, aboaded
The sudden breach on it.
Which is budded out,
For France hath flaw'd the League, and hath attached
Our Merchants goods at Bordeaux.
Is it therefore?
The Ambassador is silenced?
Marry is it.
A proper Title of a Peace, and purchased
At a superfluous rate.
Why all this Business
Our Reverend Cardinal carried.
Like it your Grace,
The State takes notice of the private difference
Betwixt you, and the Cardinal. I advise you
(And take it from a heart, that wishes towards you
Honour, and plenteous safety) that you read
The Cardinals Malice, and his Potency
Together; To consider further, that
What his high Hatred would effect, wants not
A Minister in his Power. You know his Nature,
That he's Revengeful; and I know, his Sword
Hath a sharpe edge: It's long, and't may be said
It reaches far, and where twill not extend,
Thither he darts it. Bosom up my counsel,
You'll find it wholesome. Lo, where comes that Rock
That I advice your shunning.
The Duke of Buckinghams Surveyor? Ha?
Whore's his Examination?
Here so please you.
Is he in person, ready?
I, please your Grace.
Well, we shall then know more, &amp; Buckingham
Shall lessen this big look.
This Butchers Cur is venom'd-mouth'd, and I
Have not the power to muzzle him, therefore best
Not wake him in his slumber. A Beggars book,
Out-worths a Nobles blood.
What are you chaff'd?
Ask God for Temp'rance, that's the appliance only
Which your disease requires.
I read in's looks
Matter against me, and his eye reviled
Me as his abject object, at this instant
He bores me with some trick; He's gone to the King:
Isle follow, and out-stare him.
Stay my Lord,
And let your Reason with your Choler question
What it is you go about: to climb steep hills
Requires flow pace at first. Anger is like
A full hot Horse, who being allowed his way
Selfe-mettle tyres him: Not a man in England
Can advise me like you: Be to your self,
As you would to your Friend.
Isle to the King,
And from a mouth of Honour, quite cry down
This Ipswich fellows insolence; or proclaim,
There's difference in no persons.
Be advised;
Heat not a Furnace for your foe so hot
That it do singe your self. We may out-runne
By violent swiftness that which we run at;
And lose by ouer-running: know you not,
The fire that mounts the liquor til't run ore,
In seeming to augment it, wastes it: be advised;
I say again there is no English Soul
More stronger to direct you then your self;
If with the sap of reason you would quench,
Or but allay the fire of passion.
Sir,
I am thankful to you, and Isle go along
By your prescription: but this top-proud fellow,
Whom from the flow of gall I name not, but
From sincere motions, by Intelligence,
And proofs as clear as Founts in July, when
Wee see each grain of gravel; I doe know
To be corrupt and treasonous.
Say not treasonous.
To the King Isle say it, &amp; make my vouch as strong
As shore of Rock: attend. This holy Fox,
Or Wolf, or both (for he is equal rau'nous
As he is subtle, and as prone to mischief,
As able to perform't) his mind, and place
Infecting one another, yea reciprocally,
Only to show his pomp, as well in France,
As here at home, suggests the King our Master
To this last costly Treaty: The interview,
That swallowed so much treasure, and like a glass
Did break in the wrenching.
Faith, and so it did.
Pray give me favour Sir: This cunning Cardinal
The Articles of the Combination drew
As himself pleased; and they were ratified
As he cried thus let be, to as much end,
As give a Crutch to the dead. But our Count-Cardinall
Has done this, and tic well: for worthy Wolsey
(Who cannot err) he did it. Now this follows,
(Which as I take it, is a kind of Puppy
To the old dam Treason) Charles the Emperor,
Under pretence to see the Queen his Aunt,
(For it was indeed his colour, but he came
To whisper Wolsey) here makes visitation,
His fears were that the Interview betwixt
England and France, might through their amity
Breed him some prejudice; for from this League,
Peeped harms that menaced him. Privily
Deals with our Cardinal, and as I troa
Which I doe well; for I am sure the Emperor
Paid ere he promised, whereby his Suit was granted
Ere it was asked. But when the way was made
And paved with gold: the Emperor thus desired,
Tha• he would please to alter the Kings course,
And break the foresaid peace. Let the King know
(As soon he shall by me) that thus the Cardinal
Does buy and sell his Honour as he pleases,
And for his own advantage.
I am sorry
To hear this of him; and could wish he were
Something mistaken in it.
No, not a syllable:
I doe pronounce him in that very shape
He shall appear in proof.
Your Office Sergeant: execute it.
Sir,
My Lord the Duke of Buckingham, and Earl
Of Hertford, Stafford and Northampton, I
Arrest thee of High Treason, in the name
Of our most Sovereign King.
Lo you my Lord,
The net has fallen upon me, I shall perish
Under device, and practise:
I am sorry,
To see you tan from liberty, to look on
The business present. Tic his Highness pleasure
You shall to the Tower.
It will help me nothing
To plead mine Innocence; for that dye is on me
Which makes my whet part, black. The will of Heaven
Be done in this and all things: I obey.
O my Lord Aburgany: Fare you well.
Nay, he must bear you company. The King
Is pleased you shall to the Tower, till you know
How he determines further.
As the Duke said,
The will of Heaven be done, and the Kings pleasure
By me obeyed.
Here is a warrant from
The King, t'attach Lord Mountacute, and the Bodies
Of the Dukes Confessor, Iohn de la Car,
One Gilbert Peck, his Councellor.
So, so;
These are the limbs of the Plot: no more I hope.
A Monk of the Chartreux.
O Michael Hopkins?
He.
My Surveyor is false: The ore-great Cardinal
Hath showed him gold; my life is spand already:
I am the shadow of poor Buckingham,
Whose Figure even this instant Cloud puts on,
By Darkening my clear Sun. My Lords farewell.
My life it self, and the best heart of it,
Thanks you for this great care: I stood in the level
Of a full-charg'd consederacie, and give thanks
To you that choked it. Let be called before vs
That Gentleman of Buckinghams, in person,
Isle hear him his confessions justify,
And point by point the Treasons of his Moister,
He shall again relate.
Nay, we must longer kneel; I am a Suitor.
Arise, and take place by vs; half your Suit
Never name to vs; you have half our power:
The other moity ere you ask is given,
Repeat your will, and take it.
Thank your Majesty
That you would love your self, and in that love
Not vnconsidered leave your Honour, nor
The dignity of your Office; is the point
Of my Petition.
Lady mine proceed.
I am solicited not by a few,
And those of true condition; That your Subjects
Are in great grievance: There have been Commissions
Sent down among 'em, which hath flaw'd the heart
Of all their Loyalties; wherein, although
My good Lord Cardinal, they vent reproaches
Most bitterly on you, as putter on
Of these exactions: yet the King, our Moister
Whose Honour Heaven shield from soil; even he escapes not
Language unmannerly; yea, such which breaks
The sides of loyalty, and almost appears
In loud Rebellion.
Not almost appears,
It doth appear; for, upon these Taxations,
The Clothiers all not able to maintain
The many to them longing, have put off
The Spinsters, Carders, Fullers, Weavers, who
Unfit for other life, compelled by hunger
And lack of other means, in desperate manner
Daring the event too the teeth, are all in uproar,
And danger serves among them.
Taxation?
Wherein? and what Taxation? My Lord Cardinal,
You that are blamed for it alike with vs,
Know you of this Taxation?
Please you Sir,
I know but of a single part in ought
Pertains to the State▪ and front but in that File
Where others tell steps with me.
No, my Lord?
You know no more then others? But you frame
Things that are known alike, which are not wholesome
To those which would not know them, and yet must
Perforce be their acquaintance. These exactions
(Whereof my Sovereign would have note) they are
Most pestilent to the hearing, and to bear 'em,
The Back is Sacrifice to the load; They say
They are deuis'd by you, er else you suffer
Too hard an exclamation.
Still Exaction:
The nature of it, in what kind let's know,
Is this Exaction?
I am much too venturous
In tempting of your patience; but am boldened
Under your promised pardon. The Subjects grief
Comes through Commissions, which compels from each
The sixth part of his Substance, to be levied
Without delay; and the pretence for this
Is named, your wars in France: this makes bold mouths,
Tongues spit their duties out, and cold hearts freeze
Allegiance in them; their curses now
Live where their prayers did: and it's come to pass,
This tractable obedience is a Slave
To each incensed Will: I would your Highness
Would give it quick consideration; for
There is no primer baseness.
By my life,
This is against our pleasure.
And for me,
I have no further gone in this, then by
A single voice, and that not past me, but
By learned approbation of the Judges: If I am
Traduced by ignorant Tongues, which neither know
My faculties nor person, yet will be
The Chronicles of my doing: Let me say,
It is but the fate of Place, and the rough Brake
That Virtue must go through: we must not stint
Our necessary actions, in the fear
To cope malicious Censurers, which ever,
As rau'nous Fishes doe a Vessel follow
That is new trimmed; but benefit no further
Then vainly longing. What we oft doe best,
By sick Interpreters (once weak ones) is
Not ours, or not allowed; what worst, as oft
Hitting a grosser quality, is cried up
For our best Act: if we shall stand still,
In fear our motion will be mocked, or carped at,
We should take root here, where we sit;
Or sit State-Statues only.
Things done well,
And with a care, exempt themselves from fear:
Things done without example, in their issue
Are to be feared. Have you a President
Of this Commission? I believe, not any.
We must not rend our Subjects from our Laws,
And stick them in our Will. Sixth part of each?
A trembling Contribution; why we take
From every Tree, lop, bark, and part of the Timber:
And though we leave it with a root thus hacked,
The Ayre will drink the Sap. To every County
Where this is questioned, send our Letters, with
Free pardon to each man that has denied
The force of this Commission: pray look too't;
I put it to your care.
A word with you.
Let there be Letters writ to every Shire,
Of the Kings grace and pardon: the grieved Commons
Hardly conceive of me. Let it be noised,
That through our Intercession, this Reuokement
And pardon come: I shall anon advise you
Further in the proceeding.
I am sorry, that the Duke of Buckingham
Is run in your displeasure.
It grieves many:
The Gentleman is Learned, and a most rare Speaker,
To Nature none more bound; his training such,
That he may furnish and instruct great Teachers,
And never seek for aid out of himself: yet see,
When these so Noble benefits shall prove
Not well disposed, the mind growing once corrupt,
They turn to vicious forms, ten times more ugly
Then ever they were fair. This man so complete,
Who was enroled amongst wonders; and when we
Almost with ravished listening, could not find
His hour of speech, a minute: He, (my Lady)
Hath into monstrous habits put the Graces
That once were his, and is become as black,
As if besmeared in hell. Sit by Vs, you shall hear
(This was his Gentleman in trust) of him
Things to strike Honour sad. Bid him recount
The fore-recited practises, whereof
We cannot feel too little, hear too much.
Stand forth, &amp; with bold spirit relate what you
Most like a careful Subject have collected
Out of the Duke of Buckingham.
Speak freely.
First, it was usual with him; every day
It would infect his Speech: That if the King
Should without issue dye; he will carry it so
To make the Sceptre his. These very words
I'ue heard him utter to his Son in Law,
Lord Aburgany, to whom by of the he menaced
Revenge upon the Cardinal.
Please your Highness note
This dangerous conception in this point,
Not fronted by his wish to your High person;
His will is most malignant, and it stretches
Beyond you to your friends.
My learned Lord Cardinal,
Deliver all with Charity.
Speak on;
How grounded hee his Title to the Crown
Upon our fail; to this point hast thou heard him,
At any time speak ought?
He was brought to this,
By a vain Prophecy of Nicholas Henton.
What was that Henton?
Sir, a Chartreux Fryer,
His Confessor, who fed him every minute
With words of Sovereignty.
How know thou this?
Not long before your Highness sped to France,
The Duke being at the Rose, within the Parish
Saint Laurence Poultney, did of me demand
What was the speech among the Londoners,
Concerning the French Journey. I replied,
Men fear the French would prove perfidious
To the Kings danger: presently, the Duke
Said, it was the fear indeed, and that he doubted
It would prove the verity of certain words
Spoke by a holy Monk, that oft, says he,
Hath sent to me, wishing me to permit
Iohn de la Car, my Chaplain, a choice hour
To hear from him a matter of some moment:
Whom after under the Commissions Seal,
He solemnly had sworn, that what he spoke
My Chaplain to no Creature living, but
To me, should utter, with demure Confidence,
This pausingly ensued; neither the King, nor's Heirs
(Tell you the Duke) shall prosper, bid him strive
To the love of the Commonalty, the Duke
Shall govern England.
If I know you well,
You were the Dukes Surveyor, and lost your Office
On the complaint of the Tenants; take good heed
You charge not in your spleen a Noble person,
And spoil your nobler Soul; I say, take heed;
Yes, heartily beseech you.
Let him on: Go forward.
On my Soul, Isle speak but truth.
I told my Lord the Duke, by the Devils illusions
The Monk might be deceived, and that it was dangerous
For this to ruminate on this so far, until
It forged him some design, which being believed
It was much like to doe: He answered, Tush,
It can doe me no damage; adding further,
That had the King in his last Sickness failed,
The Cardinals and Sir Thomas Louels heads
Should have gone off.
Ha? What, so rank? Ah, ha,
There's mischief in this man; can thou say further?
I can my Liedge.
Proceed.
Being at Greenwich.
After your Highness had reproved the Duke
About Sir William Blumer.
I remember of such a time, being my sworn ser∣uant,
The Duke retained him his. But on: what hence?
If (quoth he) I for this had been committed,
As to the Tower, I thought; I would have plaid
The Part my Father meant to act upon
The Usurper Richard, who being at Salsbury,
Made suit to come in's presence; which if granted,
(As he made semblance of his duty) would
Have put his knife into him.
A Giant Traitor.
Now Madam, may his Highness live in freedom,
And this man out of Prison.
God mend all.
Ther's something more would out of thee; what say?
After the Duke his Father, with the knife
He stretched him, and with one hand on his dagger,
Another spread on's breast, mounting his eyes,
He did discharge a horrible Oath, whose tenor
Was, were he evil used, he would outgo
His Father, by as much as a performance
Do's an irresolute purpose.
There's his period,
To sheath his knife in vs: he is attached,
Call him to present trial: if he may
Find mercy in the Law, it is his; if none,
Let him not seek it of vs; By day and night
Hoe's Traitor to the height.
Is it possible the spells of France should juggle
Men into such strange mysteries?
New customs,
Though they be never so ridiculous,
(Nay let 'em be unmanly) yet are followed.
As far as I see, all the good our English
Have got by the late Voyage, is but merely
A fit or two of the face, (but they are shrewd ones)
For when they hold 'em, you would swear directly
Their very noses had been Councellors
To Pippin or Clotharius, they keep State so.
They have all new legs,
And lame ones; one would take it,
That never see 'em pace before, the Spain
A Spring-halt rained among 'em.
Death my Lord,
Their clothes are after such a Pagan cut too't,
That sure the have worn out Ch•istendome: how now?
What news, Sir Thomas Louell?
Faith my Lord,
I hear of none but the new Proclamation,
That's clapped upon the Court Gate.
What is it for?
The reformation of our travelled Gallants,
That fill the Court with quarrels, talk, and Taylors.
I'm glad it is there;
Now I would pray our Monsieurs
To think an English Courtier may be wise,
And never see the Lonure.
They must either
(For so run the Conditions) leave those remnants
Of Fool and Feather, that they got in France,
With all their honourable points of ignorance
Pertaining thereunto; as Fights and Fireworks,
Abusing better men then they can be
Out of a foreign wisdom, renouncing clean
The faith they have in Tennis and tall Stockings,
Short blistred Breeches, and those types of Travel;
And understand again like honest men,
Or pack to their old Playfellowes; there, I take it,
They may Cum Praulegio, wee away
The lag end of their lewdness, and be laughed at.
Tic time to give 'em Physic, their diseases
Are grown so catching.
What a loss our Ladies
Will have of these trim vanities?
I marry,
There will be woe indeed Lords, the sly whorsons
Have got a speeding trick to lay down Ladies.
A French Song, and a Fiddle, he's no Fellow.
The Devil fiddle 'em,
I am glad they are going,
For sure there's no converting of 'em: now
An honest Country Lord as I am, beaten
A long time out of play, may bring his plain song,
And have an hour of hearing, and by it Lady
Held currant Music too.
Well said Lord Sands,
Your Colts tooth is not cast yet?
No my Lord,
Nor shall not while I have a stump.
Sir Thomas,
Whither were you a going?
To the Cardinals;
Your Lordship is a guest too.
O, it is true;
This night he makes a Supper, and a great one,
To many Lords and Ladies; there will be
The Beauty of this Kingdom Isle assure you.
That Churchman
Bears a bounteous mind indeed,
A hand as fruitful as the Land that feeds vs,
His dews fall every where.
No doubt hoe's Noble;
He had a black mouth that said other of him.
He may my Lord,
He's wherewithal in him;
Sparing would show a worse sin, then ill Doctrine,
Men of his way, should be most liberal,
They are set here for examples.
True, they are so;
But few now give so great ones:
My Barge stays;
Your Lordship shall along: Come, good Sir Thomas,
We shall be late else, which I would not be,
For I was spoke to, with Sir Henry Guilford
This night to be Comptrollers.
I am your Lordships.
Ladies,
A general welcome from his Grace
Salutes ye all; This Night he dedicates
To fair content, and you: None here he hopes
In all this Noble Bevy, has brought with her
One care abroad: hee would have all as merry:
As first, good Company, good wine, good welcome,
Can make good people.
O my Lord, y' are tardy;
The very thought of this fair Company,
Clapped wings to me.
You are young Sir Harry Guilford▪
Sir Thomas Louell, had the Cardinal
But half my Lay-thoughts in him, some of these
Should find a running Banquet, ere they rested,
I think would better please 'em: by my life,
They are a sweet society of fair ones.
O that your Lordship were but now Confessor,
To one or two of these.
I would I were,
They should find easy penance.
Faith how easy?
As easy as a down bed would afford it.
Sweet Ladies will it please you sit; Sir Harry
Place you that side, Isle take the charge of this:
His Grace is entering. Nay, you must not freeze,
Two women placed together, makes cold weather:
My Lord Sands, you are one will keep 'em waking:
Pray sit between these Ladies.
By my faith,
And thank your Lordship: by your leave sweet Ladies,
If I chance to talk a little wilde, forgive me:
I had it from my Father.
Was he mad Sir?
O, very mad, exceeding mad, in love too;
But he would bite none, just as I doe now,
He would Kiss you Twenty with a breath.
Well said my Lord:
So now y' are fairly seated: Gntlemen,
The penance lies on you; if these fair Ladies
Pass away frowning.
For my little Cure,
Let me alone.
Y' are welcome my fair Guests; that noble Lady
Or Gentleman that is not freely merry
Is not my Friend. This to confirm my welcome,
And to you all good health.
Your Grace is Noble,
Let me have such a Bowl may hold my thanks.
And save me so much talking.
My Lord Sands,
I am beholding to you: cheer your neighbours:
Ladies you are not merry; Gentlemen,
Whose fault is this?
The red wine first must rise
In their fair cheeks my Lord, then wee shall have 'em,
Talk vs to silence.
You are a merry Gamester
My Lord Sands.
Yes, if I make my play:
Heir's to your Ladyship, and pledge it Madam:
For tic to such a thing.
You cannot show me.
I told your Grace, they would talk anon.
What's that?
Look out there, some of ye.
What warlike voice,
And to what end is this? Nay, Ladies, fear not;
By all the laws of War y' are privileged.
How now, what is it?
A noble troupe of Strangers,
For so they seem; the have left their Barge and landed,
And hither make, as great Ambassadors
From foreign Princes.
Good Lord Chamberlain,
Go, give 'em welcome; you can speak the French tongue
And pray receive 'em Nobly, and conduct 'em
Into our presence, where this heaven of beauty
Shall shine at full upon them. Some attend him.
You have now a broken Banquet, but we'll mend it.
A good digestion to you all; and once more
I shower a welcome on ye: welcome all.
A noble Company: what are their pleasures?
Because they speak no English, thus they pried
To tell your Grace: That having heard by fame
Of this so Noble and so fair assembly,
This night to meet here they could doe no less,
(Out of the great respect they bear to beauty)
But leave their Flocks, and under your fair Conduct
Crave leave to view these Ladies, and entreat
An hour of Revels with 'em.
Say, Lord Chamberlain,
They have done my poor house grace:
For which I pay 'em a thousand thanks,
And pray 'em take their pleasures.
The fairest hand I ever touched: O Beauty,
Till now I never knew thee.
My Lord.
Your Grace.
Pray tell 'em thus much from me:
There should be one amongst 'em by his person
More worthy this place then my self, to whom
(If I but knew him) with my love and duty
I would surrender it.
I will my Lord.
What say they?
Such a one, they all confess
There is indeed, which they would have your Grace
Find out, and he will take it.
Let me see then,
By all your good leaves Gentlemen; here Isle make
My royal choice.
Ye have found him Cardinal,
You hold a fair Assembly; you doe well Lord:
You are a Churchman, or Isle tell you Cardinal,
I should judge now unhappily.
I am glad
Your Grace is grown so pleasant.
My Lord Chamberlain,
Prithee come hither, what fair Laddie's that?
An't please your Grace,
Sir Thomas Bullens Daughter, the Viscount Rochford,▪
One of her Highness women.
By Heaven she is a dainty one. Sweet heart,
I were unmannerly to take you out,
And not to kiss you. A health Gentlemen,
Let it go round.
Sir Thomas Louell, is the Banquet ready
In the Privy Chamber?
Yes, my Lord.
Your Grace
I fear, with dancing is a little heated.
I fear too much.
There's fresher ayre my Lord,
In the next Chamber.
Lead in your Ladies every one: Sweet Partner,
I must not yet forsake you: Let's be merry,
Good my Lord Cardinal: I have half a dozen healths,
To drink to these fair Ladies, and a measure
To lead 'em once again, and then let's dream
Who's best in favour. Let the Music knock it.
Whether away so fast?
O, God save ye:
Even to the Hall, to hear what shall become
Of the great Duke of Buckingham.
Isle save you
That labour Sir. Ell's now done but the Ceremony
Of bringing back the Prisoner.
Were you there?
Yes indeed was I.
Pray speak what he's happened.
You may guess quickly what.
Is he found guilty?
Yes truly is he,
And condemned upon it.
I am sorry fort.
So are a number more.
But pray how past it?
Isle tell you in a little. The great Duke
Came to the Bar; where, to his accusations
He pleaded still not guilty, and alleged
Many sharpe reasons to defeat the Law.
The Kings Attorney on the contrary,
Urged on the Examinations, proofs, confessions
Of divers witnesses, which the Duke desired
To him brought vine voce to his face;
At which appeared against him, his Surveyor
Sir Gilbert Peck his Chancellor, and Iohn Car,
Confessor to him, with that Devil Monk,
Hopkins, that made this mischief.
That was hee
That fed him with his Prophecies.
The same,
All these accused him strongly, which •e fine
Would have flung from him; but indeed he could not;
And so his Peers upon this evidence,
Have found him guilty of high Treason. Much
He spoke, and learnedly for life: But all
Was either pitied in him, or forgotten.
After all this, how did he bear himself?
When he was brought again to the Bar, to hear
His Knell rung out, his Judgment, he was stirred
With such an Agony, he sweat extremely,
And something spoke in choler, ill, and hasty:
But he fell to himself again, and sweetly,
In all the rest showed a most Noble patience,
I doe not think he fears death.
Sure he does not,
He never was so womanish, the cause
He may a little grieve at.
Certainly,
The Cardinal is the end of this.
Tic likely,
By all conjectures: First Kildares Attendure;
Then Deputy of Ireland, who removed
Earl Surrey, was sent thither, and in hast too,
Least he should help his Father.
That trick of State
Was a deep envious one,
At his return,
No doubt he will requite it; this is noted
(And generally) who ever the King favours,
The Cardinal instantly will find employment,
And far enough from Court too.
All the Commons
Hate him perniciously, and of my Conscience
Wish him ten faddom deep: This Duke as much
They love and dote on: call him bounteous Buckingham,
The Mirror of all curtsy.
Stay there Sir,
And see the noble ruined man you speak of.
Let's stand close and behold him.
All good people,
You that thus far have come to pity me;
Hear what I say, and then go home and lose me.
I have this day received a Traitors judgment,
And by that name must dye; yet Heaven bear witness,
And if I have a Conscience, let it sink me,
Even as the Axe falls, if I be not faithful.
The Law I bear no malice for my death,
To has done upon the premises, but Justice:
But those that sought it, I could wish more Christians:
(Be what they will) I heartily forgiue'em;
Yet let 'em look they glory not in mischief;
Nor build their evils on the graves of great men;
For then, my guiltless blood must cry against 'em.
For further life in this world I ne'er hope,
Nor will I sue, although the King have mercy•
More then I dare make faults.
You few that loved me,
And dare be bold to weep for Buckingham,
His Noble Friends and Fellows; whom to leave
Is only bitter to him, only dying:
Go with me like good Angels to my end,
And as the long divorce of Steel false on me,
Make of your Prayers one sweet Sacrifice,
And lift my Soul to Heaven.
Lead on a Gods name.
I doe beseech your Grace, for charity
If ever any malice in your heart
Were hid against me, now to forgive me frankly.
Sir Thomas Louell, I as free forgive you
As I would be forgiven: I forgive all.
There cannot be those numberless offences
Against me, that I cannot take peace with:
No black Envy shall make my Grave.
Commend me to his Grace:
And if he speak of Buckingham; pray tell him,
You met him half in Heaven: my vows and prayers
Yet are the Kings; and till my Soul forsake,
Shall cry for blessings on him. May he live
Longer then I have time to tell his years;
Ever beloved and loving, may his Rule be;
And when old Time shall lead him to his end,
Goodness and he, fill up one Monument.
To the water side I must conduct your Grace;
Then give my Charge up to Sir Nicholas Ʋaux,
Who undertakes you to your end.
Prepare there,
The Duke is coming: See the Barge be ready;
And fit it with such furniture as suites
The Greatness of his Person.
Nay, Sir Nicholas,
Let it alone; my State now will but mock me.
When I came hither, I was Lord High Constable,
And Duke of Buckingham: now, poor Edward Bohun;
Yet I am richer then my base Accusers,
That never knew what Truth meant: I now seal it;
And with that blood will make'em one day groan for it.
My noble Father Henry of Buckingham,
Who first raised head against Usurping Richard,
Flying for succour to his Servant Banister,
Being distressed; was by that wretch betrayed,
And without Trial, fell; Gods peace be with him.
Henry the Seventh succeeding, truly pitying
My Fathers loss; like a most Royal Prince
Restored me to my Honours: and out of ruins
Made my Name once more Noble. Now his Son,
Henry the Eight, Life, Honour, Name and all
That made me happy; at one stroke he's taken
For ever from the World. I had my Trial,
And must needs say a Noble one; which makes me
A little happier then my wretched Father:
Yet thus far we are one in Fortunes; both
Fell by our Servants, by those Men we loved most:
A most unnatural and faithless Service.
Heaven he's an end in all: yet, you that hear me,
This from a dying man receive as certain:
Where you are liberal of your loves and Councels,
Be sure you be not loose; for those you make friends,
And give your hearts to; when they once perceive
The least rub in your fortunes, fall away
Like water from ye, never found again
But where they mean to sink ye: all good people
Pray for me, I must now forsake ye; the last hour
Of my long weary life is come upon me:
Farewell; and when you would say something that is sad,
Speak how I fell.
I have done; and God forgive me.
O, this is full of pity; Sir, it calls
I fear, too many curse• on their heads
That were the Authors.
If the Duke be guiltless,
It is full of woe: yet I can give you inkling
Of an ensuing evil, if it fall,
Greater then this.
Good Angels keep it from vs:
What may it be? you doe not doubt my faith Sir?
This Secret is so weighty, twill require
A strong faith to conceal it.
Let me have it:
I doe not talk much.
I am confident;
You shall Sir: Did you not of late days hear
A buzzing of a Separation
Between the King and Katherine?
Yes, but it held not;
For when the King once heard it, out of anger
He sent command to the Lord Mayor straight
To stop the rumour; and allay those tongues
That durst disperse it.
But that slander Sir,
Is found a truth now: for it grows again
Fresher then ever it was; and held for certain
The King will venture at it. Either the Cardinal,
Or some about him near, have out of malice
To the good Queen▪ possessed him with a scruple
That will undo her: To confirm this too,
Cardinal Campeius is arrived, and lately,
As all think for this business.
Tic the Cardinal;
And merely to revenge him on the Emperor,
For not bestowing on him at his asking,
The Archbishopric of Toledo, this is purposed.
I think
You have hit the mark; but is it not cruel,
That she should feel the smart of this: the Cardinal
Will have his will, and she must fall.
It is woeful.
Wee are too open here to argue this:
Let's think in private more.
MY Lord, the Horses your Lordship sent for, with all the care I had, I saw well chosen, ridden, and furnished. They were young and handsome, and of the best breed in the North. When they were ready to set out for London, a man of my Lord Cardinals, b• Commission, and maine power took 'em from me, with this reason: his moister would bee served be∣fore a Subject, if not before the King, which stopped our mouths Sir.
I fear he will indeed; well, let him have them; hee will have all I think.
Well met my Lord Chamberlain.
Good day to both your Graces.
How is the King employed?
I left him private,
Full of sad thoughts and troubles.
What's the cause?
It seems the Marriage with his Brothers Wife
He's crept too near his Conscience.
No, his Conscience
He's crept too near another Lady.
Tic so;
This is the Cardinals doing: The King-Cardinall,
That blind Priest, like the eldest Son of Fortune,
Turns what he list. The King will know him one day.
Pray God he doe,
He will never know himself else.
How holily he works in all his business,
And with what zeal? For now he has cracked the League
Between vs &amp; the Emperor (the Queens great Nephew)
He dives into the Kings Soul, and there scatters
Dangers, doubts, wringing of the Conscience,
Fears, and despairs, and all these for his Marriage.
And out of all these, to restore the King,
He counsels a Divorce, a loss of her
That like a Jewel, he's hung twenty years
About his neck, yet never lost her lustre;
Of her that loves him with that excellence,
That Angels love good men with: Even of her,
That when the greatest stroke of Fortune falls
Will bless the King: and is not this course pious?
Heaven keep me from such council: tic most true
These news are every where, every tongue speaks 'em,
And every true heart weeps for it. All that dare
Look into these affairs, see this maine end,
The French Kings Sister. Heaven will one day open
The Kings eyes, that so long have slept upon
This bold bad man.
And free vs from his slavery.
We had need pray,
And heartily, for our deliverance;
Or this imperious man will work vs all
From Princes into Pages: all men's honours
Lie like one lump before him, to be fashioned
Into what pitch he please.
For me, my Lords,
I love him not, nor fear him, there's my Creed:
As I am made without him, so Isle stand,
If the King please: his Curses and his blessings
Touch me alike: the are breath I not believe in.
I knew him, and I know him: so I leave him
To him that made him proud; the Pope.
Let's in;
And with some other business, put the King
From these sad thoughts, that work too much upon him:
My Lord, you'll bear vs company?
Excuse me,
The King he's sent me otherwhere: Besides
You'll find a most unfit time to disturb him:
Health to your Lordships.
Thanks my good Lord Chamberlain.
How sad he looks; sure he is much afflicted.
Who's there? Ha?
Pray God he be not angry.
Who's there I say? How dare you thrust your selves
Into my private Meditations?
Who am I? Ha?
A gracious King, that pardons all offences
Malice ne'er meant: Our breach of Duty this way▪
Is business of Estate; in which, we come
To know your Royal pleasure.
Ye are too bold:
Go too; Isle make ye know your times of business:
Is this an hour for temporal affairs? Ha?
Who's there? my good Lord Cardinal? O my Wolsey,
The quiet of my wounded Conscience;
Thou art a cure fit for a King; you're welcome
Most learned Reverend Sir, into our Kingdom,
Use vs, and it: My good Lord, have great care,
I be not found a Talker.
Sir, you cannot;
I would your Grace would give vs but an hour
Of private conference.
We are busy; go.
This Priest he's no pride in him?
Not to speak of:
I would not be so sick though for his place:
But this cannot continue.
If it doe, Isle venture one; have at him.
I another.
Your Grace he's given a President of wisdom
Aboue all Princes, in committing freely
Your scruple to the voice• of Christendom:
Who can be angry now? What Envy reach you?
The Spaniard tide by blood and favour to her,
Must now confess, if they have any goodness,
The Trial, just and Noble. All the Clerks,
(I mean the learned ones in Christian Kingdoms)
Have their free voices. Rome (the Nurse of Judgment)
Invited by your Noble self, hath sent
One general Tongue unto vs. This good man,
This just and learned Priest, Cardinal Campeius,
Whom once more, I present unto your Highness.
And once more in mine arms I bid him welcome,
And thank the holy Conclave for their loves,
They have sent me such a Man, I would have wished for.
Your Grace must needs deserve all strangers loves,
You are so Noble: To your Highness hand
I tender my Commission; by whose virtue,
The Court of Rome commanding. You my Lord
Cardinal of York, are joined with me their Servant,
In the unpartial judging of this Business.
Two equal men: The Queen shall be acquain∣ted
Forth with for what you come. Whore's Gardiner?
I know your Majesty, he's always loved her
So dear in heart, not to deny her that
A Woman of less Place might ask by Law;
Scholars allowed freely to argue for her.
I, and the best she shall have; and my favour
To him that doe• best, God forbid else: Cardinal,
Prithee call Gardiner to me, my new Secretary.
I find him a fit fellow.
Give me your hand: much joy &amp; favour to you;
You are the Kings now.
But to be commanded
For ever by your Grace, whose hand he's raised me.
Come hither Gardiner.
My Lord of York, was not one Doctor Pa•e
In this mans place before him?
Yes, he was.
Was he not held a learned man?
Yes surely.
Believe me, there's an ill opinion spread then,
Even of your self Lord Cardinal.
How? of me?
They will not stick to say, you enuide him;
And fearing he would rise (he was so virtuous)
Kept him a foreign man still, which so grieved him,
That he ran mad, and did.
Heavens peace be with him:
That's Christian care enough: for living Murmurers,
There's places of rebuke. He was a Fool;
For he would needs be virtuous. That good Fellow,
If I command him follows my appointment,
I will have none so near else. Learn this Brother,
We live not to be grip'd by meaner persons.
Deliver this with modesty to the Queen.
The most convenient place, that I can think of
For such receipt of Learning, is Black-Fryers:
There ye shall meet about this weighty business.
My Wolsey, see it furnished, O my Lord,
Would it not grieve an able man to leave
So sweet a Bedfellow? But Conscience, Conscience;
O it is a tender place, and I must leave her.
Not for that neither; here's the pang that pinches.
His Highness, having lived so long with her, and she
So good a Lady, that no Tongue could ever
Pronounce dishonour of her; by my life,
She never knew harme-doing: Oh, now after
So many courses of the Sun enthroaned,
Still growing in a Majesty and pomp, the which
To leave, a thousand fold more bitter, then
It is sweet at first to acquire. After this Process.
To give her the avaunt, it is a pity
Would move a Monster.
Hearts of most hard temper
Melt and lament for her.
Oh Gods will, much better
She ne'er had known pomp; though't be temporal,
Yet if that quarrel. Fortune, do divorce
It from the bearer, it is a sufferance, panging
As soul and bodies severing.
Alas poor Lady,
Shoe's a stranger now again.
So much the more
Must pity drop upon her; verily
I swear, tic better to be lowly borne,
And range with humble livers in Content,
Then to be perked up in a glistering grief,
And wear a golden sorrow.
Our content
Is our best having.
By my troth, and Maidenhead,
I would not be a Queen.
Beshrew me, I would,
And venture Maidenhead for it, and so would you
For all this spice of your Hypocrisy:
You that have so fair parts of Woman on you,
Have (too) a Women's heart, which ever yet
Affected Eminence, Wealth, Sovereignty;
Which, to say sooth, are Blessings; and which gifts
(Saving your mincing) the capacity
Of your soft Cheverel Conscience, would receive,
If you might please to stretch it.
Nay, good troth.
Yes troth, &amp; troth; you would not be a Queen?
No, not for all the riches under Heaven.
Tic strange; a three pence bowed would hire me
Old as I am, to Queen it: but I pray you,
What think you of a Duchess? Have you limbs
To bear that load of Title?
No in truth.
Then you are weakly made; pluck off a little,
I would not be a young Count in your way,
For more then blushing comes to: If your back
Cannot vouchsafe this burden, tic too weak
Ever to get a Boy.
How you doe talk;
I swear again, I would not be a Queen,
For all the world:
In faith, for little England
You'd venture an emballing: I my self
Would for Carnarvanshire, although there longed
No more to the Crown but that: Lo, who comes here?
Good morrow Ladies; what were it worth to know
The secret of your conference?
My good Lord,
Not your demand; it values not your asking:
Our Mistress Sorrows we were pitying.
It was a gentle business, and becoming
The action of good women, there is hope
All will be well.
Now I pray God, Amen.
You bear a gentle mind, &amp; heavenly blessings
Follow such Creatures. That you may, fair Lady
Perceive I speak sincerely, and high notes
Tan of your many virtues; the Kings Majesty
Commends his good opinion of you, to you; and
Doe's purpose honour to you no less flowing,
Then Marchioness of Pembrooke; to which Title,
A Thousand pound a year, Annual support,
Out of his Grace, he adds.
I doe not know
What kind of my obedience, I should tender;
More then my All, is Nothing: Nor my Prayers
Are not words duly hallowed; nor my Wishes
More worth, then empty vanities: yet Prayers &amp; Wishes
Are all I can return. Beseech your Lordship,
Vouchsafe to speak my thanks, and my obedience,
As from a blush•ng Handmaid, to his Highness;
Whose health and Royalty I pray for.
Lady;
I shall not fail to approve the fair conceit
The King hath of you. I have perused her well,
Beauty and Honour in her are so mingled,
That they have caught the King: and who knows yet
But from this Lady, may proceed a Gem,
To lighten all this Isle. I'll to the King,
And say I spoke with you.
My honoured Lord.
Why this it is: See, see,
I have been begging sixteen years in Court
(Am yet a Courtier beggarly) nor could
Come pat betwixt too early, and too late
For any suit of pound•: and you, (oh fate)
A very fresh Fish here; fie, fie, fie upon
This compelled fortune: have your mouth filled up,
Before you open it.
This is strange to me.
How tastes it? Is it bitter? Forty pence, no:
There was a Lady once (tic an old Story)
That would not be a Queen, that would she not
For all the mud in Egypt; have you heard it?
Come you are pleasant.
With your Theme, I could
O're-mount the Lark: The Marchioness of Pembrooke?
A thousand pounds a year, for pure respect?
No other obligation? by my Life,
That promises mo thousands: Honours train
Is longer then his fore-skirt; by this time
I know your back will bear a Duchess. Say,
Are you not stronger then you were?
Good Lady,
Make your self mirth with your particular fancy,
And leave me out on it. Would I had no being
If this salute my blood a •ot; it faints me
To think what follows.
The Queen is comfortless, and w•e forgetful
In our long absence: pray doe not deliver,
What here y' have heard to her.
What doe you think me —
Whilst our Commission from Rome is read;
Let silence be commanded.
What's the need?
It hath already publicly been read,
And on all sides the Authority allowed,
You may then spare that time.
Be it so, proceed.
Say, Henry K. of England, come into the Court.
Henry King of England, &amp;c.
Here.
Say, Katherine Queen of England,
Come into the Court.
Katherine Queen of England, &amp;c.
Sir, I desire you do me Right and Justice,
And to bestow your pity on me; for
I am a most poor Woman, and a Stranger,
Borne out of your Dominions: having here
No Judge indifferent, nor no more assurance
Of equal Friendship and Proceeding. Alas Sir:
In what have I offended you? What cause
Hath my behaviour given to your displeasure,
That thus you should proceed to put me off,
And take your good Grace from me? Heaven witness,
I have been to you, a true and humble Wife,
At all times to your will conformable:
Ever in fear to kindle your Dislike,
Yea, subject to your Countenance: Glad, or sorry,
As I saw it inclined? When was the hour
I ever contradicted your Desire?
Or made it not mine too? Or which of your Friends
Have I not strove to love, although I knew
He were mine Enemy? What Friend of mine,
That had to him derived your Anger, did I
Continue in my Liking? Nay, gave notice
He was from thence discharged? Sir, call to mind,
That I have been your Wife, in this Obedience,
Upward of twenty years, and have been blessed
With many Children by you. If in the course
And process of this time, you can report,
And prove it too, against mine Honour, aught;
My bond to Wedlock, or my Love and Duty
Against your Sacred Person; in Gods name
Turn me away: and let the fowl'st Contempt
Shut door upon me, and so give me up
To the sharp'st kind of Justice. Please you, Sir,
The King your Father, was reputed for
A Prince most Prudent; of an excellent
And unmatched Wit, and Judgment. Ferdinand
My Father, King of Spain, was reckoned one
The wisest Prince, that there had reigned, by many
A year before. It is not to be questioned,
That they had gathered a wise Council to them
Of every Realm▪ that did debate this Business,
Who deemed our Marriage lawful. Wherefore I humbly
Beseech you Sir, to spare me, till I may
Be by my Friends in Spain, advised; whose Counsel
I will implore. If not, in the name of God
Your pleasure be fulfilled.
You have here Lady.
(And of your choice) these Reverend Fathers, men
Of singular Integrity, and Learning;
Yea, the elect of the Land, who are assembled
To plead your Cause. It shall be therefore bootless,
That longer you desire the Court, as well
For your own quiet, as to rectify
What is unsettled in the King.
His Grace
Hath spoken well, and justly: Therefore Madam,
It's fit this Royal Session do proceed,
And that (without delay) their Arguments
Be now produced, and heard.
Lord Cardinal, to you I speak.
Your pleasure, Madam.
Sir, I am about to weep; but thinking that
We are a Queen (or long have dreamed so) certain
The daughter of a King, my drops of tears,
Isle turn to sparks of fire.
Be patient yet.
I will, when you are humble; Nay before,
Or God will punish me. I do believe
(Induced by potent Circumstances) that
You are mine Enemy, and make my Challenge,
You shall not be my Judge. For it is you
Have blown this Coal, betwixt my Lord, and me;
(Which Gods dew quench) therefore, I say again,
I utterly abhor; yea, from my Soul
Refuse you for my Judge, whom yet once more
I hold my most malicious Foe, and think not
At all a Friend to truth.
I do profess
You speak not like your self: who ever yet
Have stood to Charity, and displayed the effects
Of disposition gentle, and of wisdom,
Ore-topping women's power. Madam, you do me wrong
I have no Spleen against you, nor injustice
For you, or any: how far I have proceeded,
Or how far further (Shall) is warranted
By a Commission from the Consistory,
Yea, the whole Consistory of Rome. You charge me,
That I have blown this Coal: I do deny it,
The King is present: If it be known to him,
That I gainsay my Deed, how may he wound,
And worthily my Falsehood, yea, as much
As you have done my Truth. If he know
That I am free of your Report, he knows
I am not of your wrong. Therefore in him
It lies to cure me, and the Cure is to
Remove these Thoughts from you. The which before
His Highness shall speak in, I do beseech
You (gracious Madam) to vnthinke your speaking,
And to say so no more.
My Lord, my Lord,
I am a simple woman, much too weak
To oppose your cunning. Y' are meek, &amp; humble-mouth'd
You sign your Place, and Calling, in full seeming,
With Meekness and Humility: but your Heart
Is crammed with Arrogance, Spleen, and Pride.
You have by Fortune, and his Highness favours,
Gone slightly o'er lowe steppes, and now are mounted
Where Powers are your Retainers, and your words
(Domestics to you) serve your will, is it please
Your self pronounce their Office. I must tell you,
You tender more your persons Honour, then
Your high profession Spiritual. That again
I do refuse you for my Judge, and here
Before you all, Appeal unto the Pope,
To bring my whole Cause before his Holiness,
And to be judged by him.
The Queen is obstinate,
Stubborn to Justice, apt to accuse it, and
Disdainful to be tried by it; tic not well.
Shoe's going away.
Call her again.
Katherine▪ Q of England, come into the Court.
Ʋsh. Madam, you are called back.
What need you note it? pray you keep your way,
When you are called return. Now the Lord help,
They vex me past my patience, pray you pass on;
I will not tarry: no, nor ever more
Upon this business my appearance make,
In any of their Courts.
Go thy ways Kate,
That man in the world, who shall report he he's
A better Wife, let him in nought be trusted,
For speaking false in that; thou art alone
(If thy rare qualities, sweet gentleness,
Thy meekness Saint-like, Wife-like Government,
Obeying in commanding, and thy parts
Sovereign and Piousels, could speak thee out)
The Queen of earthly Queens: Shoe's Noble borne;
And like her true Nobility, she he's
Carried her self towards me.
Most gracious Sir,
In humblest manner I require your Highness,
That it shall please you to declare in hearing
Of all these ears (for where I am robed and bound,
There must I be unloosed, although not there
At once, and fully satisfied) whether ever I
Did broach this business to your Highness, or
Laid any scruple in your way which might
Induce you to the question on it: or ever
Have to you, but with thanks to God for such
A Royal Lady, spake one, the least word that might
Be to the prejudice of her present State,
Or touch of her good Person?
My Lord Cardinal,
I doe excuse you; yea, upon mine Honour,
I free you from it: You are not to be taught
That you have many enemies, that know not
Why they are so; but like to Village Cures,
Bark when their fellows doe. By some of these
The Queen is put in anger; y' are excused:
But will you be more iustifi'de? You ever
Have wished the sleeping of this business, never desired
It to be stirred; but oft have hindered, oft
The passages made toward it; on my Honour,
I speak my good Lord Cardinal, to this point;
And thus far clear him.
Now, what moved me too't,
I will be bold with time and your attention:
Then mark the inducement. Thus it came; give heed too't:
My Conscience first received a tenderness,
Scruple, and prick, on certain Speeches uttered
By the Bishop of Bayon, then French Ambassador,
Who had been hither sent on the debating
And Marriage twixt the Duke of Orleans, and
Our Daughter Mary: In the Progress of this business,
Ere a determinate resolution, hee
(I mean the Bishop) did require a respite,
Wherein he might the King his Lord advertise,
Whether our Daughter were legitimate,
Respecting this our Marriage with the Dowager,
Sometimes our Brothers Wife. This respite shook
The bosom of my Conscience, entered me;
Yea, with a spitting power, and made to tremble
The region of my Breast, which forced such way,
That many mazed considerings, did throng
And pressed in with this Caution. First, me thought
I stood not in the smile of Heaven, who had
Commanded Nature, that my Ladies womb
If it conceived a male-child by me, should
Doe no more Offices of life too't; then
The Grave does to the dead: For her Male Issue,
Or died where they were made, ot shortly after
This world had aired them. Hence I took a thought,
This was a Judgment on me, that my Kingdom
(Well worthy the best Heir of the World) should not
Be gladded in it by me. Then follows, that
I weighed the danger which my Realms stood in
By this my Issues fail, and that gave to me
Many a groaning throw: thus hulling in
The wild Sea of my Conscience, I did steer
Toward this remedy, whereupon we are
Now present here together: that's to say,
I meant to rectify my Conscience, which
I then did feel full sick, and yet not well,
By all the Reverend Fathers of the Land,
And Doctors learned. First I began in private,
With you my Lord of Lincoln; you remember
How under my oppression I did reeke
When I first moved you.
Very well my Liedge.
I have spoke long, be pleased your self to say
How far you satisfied me.
So please your Highness,
The question did at first so stagger me,
Bearing a State of mighty moment in it,
And consequence of dread, that I committed
The daringst Counsel which I had to doubt,
And did entreat your Highness to this course,
Which you are running here.
I then moved you,
My Lord of Canterbury, and got your leave
To make this present Summons vnsolicited.
I left no Reverend Person in this Court;
But by particular consent proceeded
Under your hands and Seals; therefore go on,
For no dislike in the world against the person
Of the good Queen; but the sharpe thorny points
Of my alleged reasons, drives this forward:
Prove but our Marriage lawful, by my Life
And Kingly Dignity, we are contented
To wear our mortal State to come, with her,
(Katherine our Queen) before the primest Creature
That's Parragon'd of the World
So please your Highness,
The Queen being absent, it is a needful fitness,
That we adiourne this Court till further day;
Mean while, must be an earnest motion
Made to the Queen to call back her Appeal
She intends unto his Holiness.
I may perceive
These Cardinals trifle with me: I abhor
This dilatory sloth, and tricks of Rome.
My learned and well-beloved Servant Cranmer,
Prithee return, with thy approach: I know,
My comfort comes along: break up the Court;
I say, set on.
Take thy Lute wench,
My Soul grows sad with troubles,
Sing, and disperse 'em if thou can: leave working:
ORpheus with his Lute made Trees,
And the Mountain tops that freeze,
Bow themselves when he did sing.
To his Music, Plants and Flowers
Ever sprung; as Sun and Showers,
There had made a lasting Spring.
Every thing that heard him play,
Even the Billows of the Sea,
Hung their heads, &amp; then lay by.
In sweet Music is such Art,
Killing care, &amp; grief of heart,
Fall asleep, or hearing dye.
How now?
And't please your Grace, the two great Cardinals
Wait in the presence.
Would they speak with me?
They wild me say so Madam.
Pray their Graces
To come near: what can be their business
With me, a poor weak woman, fallen from favour?
I doe not like their coming; now I think on it,
They should bee good men, their affairs as righteous:
But all Hoods, make not Monks.
Peace to your Highness.
Your Graces find me here part of a Housewife,
(I would be all) against the worst may happen:
What are your pleasures with me, reverent Lords?
May it please you Noble Madam, to withdraw
Into your private Chamber; we shall give you
The full cause of our coming.
Speak it here.
There's nothing I have done yet of my Conscience
Deserves a Corner: would all other Women
Could speak this with as free a Soul as I doe.
My Lords, I care not (so much I am happy
Aboue a number) if my actions
Were tri'de by every tongue, every eye saw 'em,
Envy and base opinion set against 'em,
I know my life so even. If your business
Seek me out, and that way I am Wife in;
Out with it boldly: Truth loves open dealing.
Tanta est ergo te mantis integritas Regina serenissima.
O good my Lord, no Latin;
I am not such a Truant since my coming,
As not to know the Language I have lived in:
A strange Tongue makes my cause more strange, suspiti∣os:
Pray speak in English; here are some will thank you,
If you speak truth, for their poor Mistress sake;
Believe me she he's had much wrong. Lord Cardinal,
The willing'st sin I ever yet committed,
May be absolved in English.
Noble Lady,
I am sorry my integrity should breed,
(And service to his Majesty and you)
So deep suspicion, where all faith was meant;
We come not by the way of Accusation,
To taint that honour every good Tongue blesses;
Nor to betray you any way to sorrow;
You have too much good Lady: But to know
How you stand minded in the weighty difference
Between the King and you, and to deliver
(Like free and honest men) our just opinions,
And comforts to our cause.
Most honoured Madam,
My Lord of York, out of his Noble nature,
Zeal and obedience he still bore your Grace,
Forgetting (like a good man) your late Censure
Both of his truth and him (which was too far)
Offers, as I doe, in a sign of peace,
His Service, and his Counsel.
To betray me.
My Lords, I thank you both for your good wills,
Ye speak like honest men, (pray God ye prove so)
But how to make ye suddenly an Answer
In such a point of weight, so near mine Honour,
(More near my Life I fear) with my weak wit;
And to such men of gravity and learning;
In truth I know not. I was set at work,
Among my Maids, full little (God knows) looking
Either for such men, or such business;
For her sake that I have been, for I feel
The last fit of my Greatness; good your Graces
Let me have time and Council for my Cause:
Alas, I am a Woman frendlesse, hopeless.
Madam,
You wrong the Kings love with these fears,
Your hopes and friends are infinite.
In England,
But little for my profit can you think Lords,
That any English man dare give me Council?
Or be a known friend against his Highness pleasure,
(Though he be grown so desperate to be honest)
And live a Subject? Nay forsooth, my Friends,
They that must weigh out my afflictions,
They that my trust must grow to, live not here,
They are (as all my other comforts) far hence
In mine own Country Lords.
I would your Grace
Would leave your griefs, and take my Counsel.
How Sir?
Put your maine cause into the Kings protection,
Hoe's loving and most gracious. Twill be much,
Both for your Honour better, and your Cause:
For if the trial of the Law o'er take ye,
You'll part away disgraced.
He tells you rightly.
Ye tell me what ye wish for both, my ruin:
Is this your Christian Council? Out upon ye.
Heaven is aboue all yet; there sits a Judge.
That no King can corrupt.
Your rage mistakes vs.
The more shame for ye; holy men I thought ye,
Upon my Soul two reverend Cardinal Virtues:
But Cardinal Sins, and hollow hearts I fear ye:
Mend 'em for shame my Lords: Is this your comfort?
The Cordial that ye bring a wretched Lady?
A woman lost among ye, laugh't at, scorned?
I will not wish ye half my miseries,
I have more Charity. But say I warned ye;
Take heed, for heavens sake take heed, least at once
The burden of my sorrows, fall upon ye.
Madam, this is a mere distraction,
You turn the good we offer, into envy.
Ye turn me into nothing. Woe upon ye,
And all such false Professors. Would you have me
(If you have any Justice, any Pity,
If ye be any thing but Churchmens habits)
Put my sick cause into his hands, that hates me?
Alas, he's banished me his Bed already,
His Love, too long ago. I am old my Lords,
And all the Fellowship I hold now with him
Is only my Obedience. What can happen
To me, aboue this wretchedness? All your Studies
Make me a Curse, like this.
Your fears are worse.
Have I lived thus long (let me speak my self,
Since Virtue finds no friends) a Wife, a true one?
A Woman (I dare say without Vainglory)
Never yet branded with Suspicion?
Have I, with all my full Affections
Still met the King? Loved him next Heaven? Obeyed him?
Bin (out of fondness) superstitious to him?
Almost forgot my Prayers to content him?
And am I thus rewarded? It is not well Lords.
Bring me a constant woman to her Husband,
One that ne'er dreamed a Joy, beyond his pleasure;
And to that Woman (when she has done most)
Yet will I add an Honour; a great Patience.
Madam, you wander from the good
We aim at.
My Lord,
I dare not make my self so guilty,
To give up willingly that Noble Title
Your Master wed me to: nothing but death
Shall ever divorce my Dignities.
Pray hear me.
Would I had never trod this English Earth,
Or felt the Flatteries that grow upon it:
Ye have Angels Faces; but Heaven knows your hearts.
What will become of me now, wretched Lady?
I am the most unhappy Woman living.
Alas (poor Wenches) where are now your Fortunes?
Shipwrecked upon a Kingdom, where no Pity,
No Friends, no Hope, no Kindred weep for me?
Almost no Grave allowed me? Like the Lily
That once was Mistress of the Field, and flourished,
Isle hang my head, and perish.
If your Grace
Could but be brought to know, our Ends are honest,
Youl'd feel more comfort. Why should we (good Lady)
Upon what cause wrong you? Alas, our Places,
The way of our Profession is against it;
We are to Cure such sorrows, not to sow 'em.
For Goodness sake, consider what you do,
How you may hurt your self: I, utterly
Grow from the Kings Acquaintance, by this Carriage.
The hearts of Princes kiss Obedience,
So much they love it. But to stubborn Spirits,
They swell and grow, as terrible as storms.
I know you have a Gentle, Noble temper,
A Soul as even as a Calm; Pray think vs,
Those we profess, Peace-makers, Friends, and Servants.
Madam, you'll find it so:
You wrong your Virtues
With these weak Women's fears. A Noble Spirit
As yours was, put into you, ever casts
Such doubts as false Coin from it. The King loves you,
Beware you loose it not: For vs (if you please
To trust vs in your business) we are ready
To use our utmost Studies, in your service.
Do what ye will, my Lords:
And pray forgive me;
If I have used my self unmannerly,
You know I am a Woman, lacking wit
To make a seemly answer to such persons.
Pray do my service to his Majesty,
He he's my heart yet, and shall have my Prayers
While I shall have my life. Come reverend Fathers,
Bestow your Councels on me. She now begs
That little thought when she set footing here,
She should have bought her Dignities so dear.
If you will now unite in your Complaints,
And force them with a Constancy, the Cardinal
Cannot stand under them. If you omit
The offer of this time, I cannot promise,
But that you shall sustain more new disgraces,
With these you bear already.
I am joyful
To meet the least occasion, that may give me
Remembrance of my Father-in-Law, the Duke,
To be revenged on him.
Which of the Peers
Have vncontemn'd gone by him, or at least
Strangely neglected? When did he regard
The stamp of Nobleness in any person
Out of himself?
My Lords, you speak your pleasures:
What he deserves of you and me, I know:
What we can do to him (though now the time
Gives way to vs) I much fear. If you cannot
Bar his access to the King, never attempt
Any thing on him: for he hath a Witchcraft
Over the King in's Tongue.
O fear him not,
His spell in that is out: the King hath found
Matter against him, that for ever mars
The Honey of his Language. No, he's settled
(Not to come off) in his displeasure.
Sir,
I should be glad to hear such News as this
Once every hour.
Believe it, this is true.
In the Divorce, his contrary proceedings
Are all unfolded: wherein he appears,
As I would wish mine Enemy.
How came
His practises to light?
Most strangely.
O how? how?
The Cardinals Letters to the Pope miscarried,
And came to the eye of the King, wherein was read
How that the Cardinal did entreat his Holiness
To stay the Judgment of the Divorce; for if
It did take place, I do (quoth he) perceive
My King is tangled in affection, to
A Creature of the Queens, Lady Anne Bullen.
He's the King this?
Believe it.
Will this work?
The King in this perceives him, how he coasts
And hedges his own way. But in this point,
All his tricks founder, and he brings his Physic
After his Patients death; the King already
Hath married the fair Lady.
Would he had.
May you be happy in your wish my Lord,
For I profess you have it.
Now all my joy
Trace the Conjunction.
My Amen too't.
All men's.
There's order given for her Coronation:
Marry this is yet but young, and may be left
To some ears unrecounted. But my Lords
She is a gallant Creature, and complete
In mind and feature. I persuade me, from her
Will fall some blessing to this Land, which shall
In it be memorised.
But will the King
Digest this Letter of the Cardinals?
The Lord forbid.
Marry Amen.
No, no:
There be more Wasps that buzz about his Nose,
Will make this sting the sooner. Cardinal Campeius,
Is stolen away to Rome, hath 'tane no leave,
He's left the cause of the King vnhandled, and
Is posted as the Agent of our Cardinal,
To second all his plot. I do assure you,
The King cried Ha, at this.
Now God incense him,
And let him cry Ha, louder.
But my Lord
When returns Cranmer?
He is returned in his Opinions, which
Have satisfied the King for his Divorce,
Together with all famous Colleges
Almost in Christendom: shortly (I believe)
His second Marriage shall be published, and
Her Coronation▪ Katherine no more
Shall be called Queen, but Princess Dowager,
And Widow to Prince Arthur.
This same Cranmer's
A worthy Fellow, and hath tan much pain
In the Kings business.
He he's, and we shall see him
For it an Arch-byshop.
So I hear.
It is so.
The Cardinal.
Observe, observe, hoe's moody.
The Packet Cromwell,
Gived you the King?
To his own hand, in's Bed-chamber.
Looked he of the inside of the Paper?
Presently
He did vnseale them, and the first he viewed,
He did it with a Serious mind: a heed
Was in his countenance. You he bad
Attend him here this Morning.
Is he ready to come abroad?
I think by this he is.
Leave me a while.
It shall be to the Duchess of Alanson,
The French Kings Sister; He shall marry her.
Anne Bullen? No: Isle no Anne Bullens for him,
There's more in it then fair Visage. Bullen?
No, we'll no Bullens: Speedily I wish
To hear from Rome. The Marchioness of Penbroke?
He's discontented.
Maybe he hears the King
Does whet his Anger to him.
Sharpe enough,
Lord for thy Justice.
The late Queens Gentlewoman?
A Knights Daughter
To be her Mistress Mistress? The Queens, Queen?
This Candle burns not clear, it is I must snuff it,
Then out it goes. What though I know her virtuous
And well deserving? yet I know her for
A spleeny Lutheran, and not wholesome to
Our cause, that she should lye in the bosom of
Our hard ruled King. Again, there is sprung up
An Heretic, an Arch-one; Cranmer, one
Hath crawled into the favour of the King,
And is his Oracle.
He is vexed at something.
I would it were something yt would fret the string,
The Master-cord on's heart.
The King, the King.
What piles of wealth hath he accumulated
To his own portion? And what expense by' the hour
Seems to flow from him? How, in the name of Thrift
Does he rake this together? Now my Lords,
Saw you the Cardinal?
My Lord, we have
Stood here observing him. Some strange Commotion
Is in his brain: He bites his lip, and starts,
Stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground,
Then lays his finger on his Temple: straight
Springs out into fast gate, then stops again,
Strikes his breast hard, and anon, he casts
His eye against the Moon: in most strange Postures
We have seen him set himself.
It may well be,
There is a mutiny in's mind. This morning,
Papers of State he sent me, to peruse
As I required: and wot you what I found
There (on my Conscience put unwittingly)
Forsooth an Inuentory, thus importing
The several parcels of his Plate his Treasure,
Rich Stuffs and Ornaments of Household, which
I find at such proud Rate, that it out-speakes
Possession of a Subject.
It's Heavens will,
Some Spirit put this paper in the Packet,
To bless your eye withal.
If we did think
His Contemplation w•re aboue the earth,
And fixed on Spiritual object, he should still
Dwell in his Musings, but I am afraid
His Thinkings are below the Moon, not worth
His serious considering.
Heaven forgive me,
Ever God bless your Highness.
Good my Lord,
You are full of Heavenly stuff, and bear the Inuentory
Of your best Graces, in your mind; the which
You were now running o'er: you have scarce time
To steal from Spiritual leisure, a brief span
To keep your earthly Audit, sure in that
I deem you an ill Husband, and am gald
To have you therein my Companion.
Sir,
For Holy Offices I have a time; a time
To think upon the part of business, which
I bear in the State: and Nature does require
Her times of preservation, which perforce
I her frail son, amongst my Brethren mortal,
Must give my tendance to.
You have said well.
And ever may your Highness yoke together,
(As I will lend you cause) my doing well,
With my well saying.
It is well said again,
And it is a kind of good deed to say well,
And yet words are no deeds. My Father loved you,
He said he did, and with his deed did Crown
His word upon you. Since I had my Office,
I have kept you next my Heart, have not alone
Employed you where high Profits might come home,
But par'd my present Hauings, to bestow
My Bounties upon you.
What should this mean?
The Lord increase this business.
Have I not made you
The prime man of the State? I pray you tell me.
If what I now pronounce, you have found true▪
And if you may confess it, say withal
If you are bound to vs, or no. What say you?
My Sovereign, I confess your Royal graces
Showered on me daily, have been more then could
My studied purposes requite, which went
Beyond all mans endeavours. My endeavours,
Have ever come too short of my Desires,
Yet filled with my Abilities: Mine own ends
Have been mine so, that evermore they pointed
To the good of your most Sacred Person, and
The profit of the State. For your great Graces
Heaped upon me (poor Vndeseruer) I
Can nothing render but Allegiant thanks,
My Prayers to heaven for you; my Loyalty
Which ever he's, and ever shall be growing,
Till death (that Winter) kill it.
Fairly answered:
A Loyal, and obedient Subject is
Therein illustrated, the Honour of it
Does pay the Act of it, as in the contrary
The foulness is the punishment. I presume,
That as my hand he's opened Bounty to you,
My heart dropped Love, my power rained Honour, more
On you, then any: So your Hand, and Heart,
Your Brain, and every Function of your power,
Should, notwithstanding that your bond of duty,
As it were in Loves particular, be more
To me your Friend, then any.
I do profess,
That for your Highness good, I ever laboured
More then mine own: that am, have, and will be
(Though all the world should crack their duty to you,
And throw it from their Soul, though perils did
Abound, as thick as thought could make 'em, and
Appear in forms more horrid) yet my Duty,
As doth a Rock against the chiding Flood,
Should the approach of this wilde River break,
And stand unshaken yours.
It is Nobly spoken:
Take notice Lords, he he's a Loyal breast,
For you have seen him open it. Read o'er this,
And after this, and then to Breakfast with
What appetite you have.
What should this mean?
What sudden Anger's this? How have I reaped it?
He parted Frowning from me, as if Ruin
Leaped from his Eyes. So looks the chafed Lyon
Upon the daring Huntsman that has galled him:
Then makes him nothing. I must read this paper:
I fear the Story of his Anger. It is so:
This paper he's undone me: It is the Account
Of all that world of Wealth I have drawn together
For mine own ends, (Indeed to gain the Popedome,
And fee my Friends in Rome.) O Negligence!
Fit for a Fool to fall by: What cross Devil
Made me put this maine Secret in the Packet
I sent the King? Is there no way to cure this?
No new device to beat this from his Brains?
I know twill stir him strongly; yet I know
A way, if it take right, in spite of Fortune
Will bring me off again. What's this? To the Pope?
The Letter (as I live) with all the Business
I writ too's Holiness. Nay then, farewell:
I have touched the highest point of all my Greatness,
And from that full Meridian of my Glory,
I haste now to my Setting. I shall fall
Like a bright exhalation in the Evening,
And no man see me more.
Hear the Kings pleasure Cardinal,
Who commands you
To render up the Great Seal presently
Into our hands, and to Confine your self
To Asher-house, my Lord of Winchesters,
Till you hear further from his Highness.
Stay:
Whore's your Commission? Lords, words cannot carry
Authority so weighty.
Who dare cross 'em,
Bearing the Kings will from his mouth expressly?
Till I find more then will, or words to do it,
(I mean your malice) know, Officious Lords,
I dare, and must deny it. Now I feel
Of what course Mettle ye are molded, Envy,
How eagerly ye follow my Disgraces
As if it fed ye, and how sleek and wanton
Ye appear in every thing may bring my ruin?
Follow your envious courses, men of Malice;
You have Christian warrant for 'em, and no doubt
In time will find their fit Rewards. That Seal
You ask with such a Violence, the King
(Mine, and your Master) with his own hand, gave me:
Bad me enjoy it, with the Place, and Honours
During my life; and to confirm his Goodness,
Ti'de it by Letters Patents. Now, who'll take it?
The King that gave it.
It must be himself then.
Thou art a proud Traitor, Priest.
Proud Lord, thou lie:
Within these forty hours, Surrey durst better
Have burnt that Tongue, then said so.
Thy Ambition
(Thou Scarlet sin) robbed this bewailing Land
Of Noble Buckingham, my Father-in-Law,
The heads of all thy Brother-Cardinals,
(With thee, and all thy best parts bound together)
Weighed not a hair of his. Plague of your policy,
You sent me Deputy for Ireland,
Far from his succour; from the King, from all
That might have mercy on the fault, thou gau'st him:
Whilst your great Goodness, out of holy pity,
Absolved him with an Axe.
This, and all else
This talking Lord can lay upon my credit,
I answer, is most false. The Duke by Law
Found his deserts. How innocent I was
From any private malice in his end,
His Noble Jury, and foul Cause can witness.
If I loved many words, Lord, I should tell you,
You have as little Honesty, as Honour,
That in the way of Loyalty, and Truth,
Toward the King, my ever Royal Master,
Dare mate a sounder man then Surrie can be,
And all that love his follies.
By my Soul,
Your long Coat (Priest) protects you,
Thou should feel
My Sword in the life blood of thee else. My Lords,
Can ye endure to hear this Arrogance?
And from this Fellow? If we live thus tamely,
To be thus Iaded by a piece of Scarlet,
Farewell Nobility: let his Grace go forward,
And dare vs with his Cap, like Larks.
All Goodness
Is poison to thy Stomach.
Yes, that goodness
Of gleaning all the Lands wealth into one,
Into your own hands (Cardinal) by Extortion:
The goodness of your intercepted Packets
You writ to 'th Pope, against the King: your goodness
Since you provoke me, shall be most notorious.
My Lord of Norfolk, as you are truly Noble,
As you respect the common good, the State
Of our despised Nobility, our Issues,
(Whom if he live, will scarce be Gentlemen)
Produce the grand sum of his sins, the Articles
Collected from his life. Isle startle you
Worse then the Sacring Bell, when the browne Wench
Lay kissing in your Arms, Lord Cardinal.
How much me thinks, I could despise this man,
But that I am bound in Charity against it.
Those Articles, my Lord, are in the Kings hand:
But thus much, they are foul ones.
So much fairer
And spotless, shall mine Innocence arise,
When the King knows my Truth.
This cannot save you:
I thank my Memory, I yet remember
Some of these Articles, and out they shall.
Now, if you can blush, and cry guilty Cardinal,
You'll show a little Honesty.
Speak on Sir,
I dare your worst Objections: If I blush,
It is to see a Nobleman want manners.
I had rather want those, then my head;
Have at you.
First, that without the Kings assent or knowledge,
You wrought to be a Legate, by which power
You maimed the Jurisdiction of all Bishops.
Then, That in all you writ to Rome, or else
To Foreign Princes, Ego &amp; Rex mouse
Was still inscribed: in which you brought the King
To be your Servant.
Then, that without the knowledge
Either of King or Council, when you went
Ambassador to the Emperor, you made bold
To carry into Flanders, the Great Seal.
Item, You sent a large Commission
To Gregory de Cassado, to conclude
Without the Kings will, or the States allowance,
A League between his Highness, and Ferrari.
That out of mere Ambition, you have cause
Your holy-Hat to be stamped on the Kings Coin.
Then, That you have sent innumerable substance,
(By what means got, I leave to your own conscience)
To furnish Rome, and to prepare the ways
You have for Dignities, to the mere undoing
Of all the Kingdom. Many more there are,
Which since they are of you, and odious,
I will not taint my mouth with.
O my Lord,
Press not a falling man too far: it is Virtue:
His faults lye open to the Laws, let •em
(Not you) correct him. My heart weeps to see him
So little, of his great Self.
I forgive him.
Lord Cardinal, the Kings further pleasure is,
Because all those things you have done of late
By your power Legatiue within this Kingdom,
Fall into' the compass of a Praemunire;
That therefore such a Writ be sued against you,
To forfeit all your Goods, Lands, Tenements,
Castles, and whatsoever, and to be
Out of the Kings protection. This is my Charge.
And so we'll leave you to your Meditations
How to live better. For your stubborn answer
About the giving back the Great Seal to vs,
The King shall know it, and (no doubt) shall thank you.
So fare you well, my little good Lord Cardinal.
So farewell, to the little good you bear me.
Farewell? A long farewell to all my Greatness.
This is the state of Man; to day he puts forth
The tender Leaves of hopes, to morrow Blossoms,
And bears his blushing Honours thick upon him:
The third day, comes a Frost; a killing Frost,
And when he thinks, good easy man, full surely
His Greatness is a ripening, nippes his root,
And then he false as I do. I have ventured
Like little wanton Boys that swim on bladders:
This many Summers in a Sea of Glory,
But far beyond my depth: my high-blowne Pride
At length broke under me, and now he's left me
Weary, and old with Service, to the mercy
Of a rude stream, that must for ever hide me.
Vain pomp, and glory of this World, I hate ye▪
I feel my heart new opened. Oh how wretched
Is that poor man, that hangs on Princes favours?
There is betwixt that smile we would aspire too,
That sweet Aspect of Princes, and their ruin,
More pangs, and fears then wars, or women have;
And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer,
Never to hope again.
Why how now Cromwell?
I have no power to speak Sir.
What, amazed
At my misfortunes? Can thy Spirit wonder
A great man should decline. Nay, and you weep
I am fallen indeed.
How does your Grace.
Why well:
Never so truly happy, my good Cromwell,
I know my self now, and I feel within me,
A peace aboue all earthly Dignities,
A still, and quiet Conscience. The King he's cured me,
I humbly thank his Grace: and from these shoulders
These ruined Pillars, out of pity, taken
A load, would sink a Navy, (too much Honour.)
O it is a burden Cromwell, it is a burden
Too heavy for a man, that hopes for Heaven.
I am glad your Grace,
He's made that right use of it.
I hope I have:
I am able now (me thinks)
(Out of a Fortitude of Soul, I feel)
To endure more Miseries, and greater far
Then my Weake-hearted Enemies, dare offer.
What News abroad?
The heaviest, and the worst,
Is your displeasure with the King.
God bless him.
The next is, that Sir Thomas Moore is chosen Lord Chancellor, in your place.
That's somewhat sudden.
But he's a Learned man. May he continue
Long in his Highness favour, and do Justice
For Truths-sake, and his Conscience; that his bones,
When he he's run his course, and sleeps in Blessings,
May have a Tomb of Orphants tears wept on him.
What more?
That Cranmer is returned with welcome;
Installed Lord Arch-byshop of Canterbury.
That's News indeed.
Last, that the Lady Anne,
Whom the King hath in secrecy long married,
This day was viewed in open, as his Queen,
Going to Chapel: and the voice is now
Only about her Coronation.
There was the weight that pulled me down.
O Cromwell,
The King he's gone beyond me: All my Glories
In that one woman, I have lost for ever.
No Sun, shall ever usher forth mine Honours,
Or gilde again the Noble Troops that weighted
Upon my smiles. Go get thee from me Cromwell,
I am a poor fallen man, unworthy now
To be thy Lord, and Master. Seek the King
(That Sun, I pray may never set) I have told him,
What, and how true thou art; he will advance thee:
Some little memory of me, will stir him
(I know his Noble Nature) not to let
Thy hopeful service perish too. Good Cromwell
Neglect him not; make use now, and provide
For thine own future safety.
O my Lord,
Must I then leave you? Must I needs forgo
So good, so Noble, and so true a Master?
Bear witness, all that have not hearts of Iron,
With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his Lord.
The King shall have my service; but my prayers
For ever, and for ever shall be yours.
Cromwell, I did not think to shed a tear
In all my Miseries: But thou hast forced me
(Out of thy honest truth) to play the Woman.
Let's dry our eyes: And thus far hear me Cromwell,
And when I am forgotten, as I shall be,
And sleep in dull cold Marble, where no mention
Of me, more must be heard of: Say I taught thee;
Say Wolsey, that once trod the ways of Glory,
And sounded all the Depths, and Shoals of Honour,
Found thee a way (out of his wrack) to rise in:
A sure, and safe one, though thy Master mist it.
Mark but my Fall, and that that Ruined me:
Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away Ambition,
By that sin fell the Angels: how can man then
(The Image of his Maker) hope to win by it?
Love thy self last, cherish those hearts that hate thee;
Corruption wins not more then Honesty.
Still in thy right hand, carry gentle Peace
To silence envious Tongues. Be just, and fear not;
Let all the ends thou aim at, be thy Countries,
Thy Gods, and Truths. Then if thou fall (O Cromwell)
Thou fall a blessed Martyr.
Serve the King: And prithee lead me in:
There take an Inuentory of all I have,
To the last penny, it is the Kings. My Robe,
And my Integrity to Heaven, is all,
I dare now call mine own. O Cromwell, Cromwell,
Had I but served my God, with half the Zeal
I served my King: he would not in mine Age
Have left me naked to mine Enemies.
Good Sir, have patience.
So I have. Farewell
The Hopes of Court, my Hopes in Heaven do dwell.
Y' are well met once again.
So are you.
You come to take your stand here, and behold
The Lady Anne, pass from her Coronation.
It is all my business. At our last encounter,
The Duke of Buckingham came from his Trial.
It is very true. But that time offered sorrow,
This general joy.
It is well: The Citizens
I am sure have shown at full their Royal minds,
As let 'em have their rights, they are ever forward
In Celebration of this day with Shows,
Pageants, and Sights of Honour.
Never greater,
Not Isle assure you better taken Sir.
May I be bold to ask what that contains,
That Paper in your hand.
Yes, it is the List
Of those that claim their Offices this day,
By custom of the Coronation.
The Duke of Suffolk is the first, and claims
To be high Steward; Next the Duke of Norfolk,
He to be Earl Marshall: you may read the rest.
I thank you Sir: Had I not known those customs,
I should have been beholding to your Paper:
But I beseech you, what's become of Katherine
The Princess Dowager? How goes her business?
That I can tell you too. The Archbishop
Of Canterbury, accompanied with other
Learned, and Reverend Fathers of his Order,
Held a late Court at Du•stable; six miles off
From Ampthill, where the Princess lay, to which
She was often cited by them, but appeared not:
And to be short, for not Appearance, and
The Kings late Scruple, by the maine assent
Of all these Learned men, she was divorced,
And the late Marriage made of none effect:
Since which, she was removed to Kymmal•on,
Where she remains now sick.
Alas good Lady.
The Trumpets sound: Stand close,
The Queen is coming.
A lively Flourish of Trumpets.
Then, two Judges.
Lord Chancellor, with Purse and Mace before him.
Choristers singing.
Mayor of London, bearing the Mace. Then Garter, in his Coat of Arms, and on his head he wore a Gilt Copper Crown.
Marquess Dorset, bearing a Sceptre of Gold, on his head, a Demi Coronall of Gold. With him, the Earl of Surrey, bearing the Rod of Silver with the Dove, Crowned with an Earls Coronet. Collars of Esses.
Duke of Suffolk, in his Robe of Estate, his Coronet on his head, bearing a long white Wand, as High Steward. With him, the Duke of Norfolk, with the Rod of Marshalship, a Coronet on his head. Collars of Esses.
A Canopy, borne by four of the Cinque-Ports, under it the Queen in her Robe, in her hair, richly adorned with Pearl, Crowned. On each side her, the Bishops of London, and Winchester.
The Old Duchess of Norfolk, in a Coronall of Gold, wrought with Flowers bearing the Queens Train.
Certain Ladies or Countesses, with plain Circlets of Gold, without Flowers.
A Royal Train believe me: These I know:
Who's that that bears the Sceptre?
Marquess Dorset,
And that the Earl of Surrey, with the Rod.
A bold brave Gentleman. That should bee
The Duke of Suffolk.
It is the same: high Steward.
And that my Lord of Norfolk?
Yes.
Heaven bless thee,
Thou hast the sweetest face I ever looked on.
Sir, as I have a Soul, she is an Angel;
Our King has all the Indies in his Arms,
And more, and richer, when he strains that Lady,
I cannot blame his Conscience.
They that bear
The Cloth of Honour over her, are four Barons
Of the Cinque Ports.
Those men are happy,
And so are all, are near her.
I take it, she that carries up the Train,
Is that old Noble Lady, Duchess of Norfolk.
It is, and all the rest are Countesses.
Their Coronets say so. These are Stars indeed,
And sometimes falling ones.
No more of that.
God save you Sir. Where have you bin broiling?
Among the crowed in the Abbey, where a finger
Could not be wedged in more: I am stifled
With the mere rankness of their joy.
You saw the Ceremony?
That I did.
How was it?
Well worth the seeing.
Good Sir, speak it to vs?
As well as I am able. The rich stream
Of Lords, and Ladies, having brought the Queen
To a prepared place in the Queen•e, fell off
A distance from her; while her Grace sate down
To rest a while, some half an hour, or so,
In a rich Chair of State, opposing freely
The Beauty of her Person to the People.
Believe me Sir, she is the goodliest Woman
That ever lay by man: which when the people
Had the full view of, such a noise arose,
As the shrouds make at Sea, in a stiff Tempest,
As loud, and to as many Tunes. Hats▪ Cloaks,
(Doublets, I think) flew up, and had their Faces
Bin loose, this day they had been lost. Such joy
I never saw before. Great bellied women,
That had not half a week to go, like Rams
In the old time of War, would shake the press
And make 'em reel before 'em. No man living
Could say this is my wife there, all were woven
So strangely in one piece.
But what followed?
At length, her Grace rose, and with modest paces
Came to the Altar, where she kneeled, and Saint-like
Cast her fair eyes to Heaven, and prayed devoutly.
Then rose again, and bowed her to the people:
When by the Arch-byshop of Canterbury,
She had all the Royal makings of a Queen;
As holy Oil, Edward Confessors Crown,
The Rod, and Bird of Peace, and all such Emblems
Laid Nobly on her: which performed, the Quire
With all the choicest Music of the Kingdom,
Together sung Te Deum. So she parted,
And with the same full State paced back again
To Yorke-Place, where the Feast is held.
Sir,
You must no more call it Yorke-place that's past:
For since the Cardinal fell, that Titles lost,
It is now the Kings, and called White-Hall.
I know it:
But it is so lately altered, that the old name
Is fresh about me.
What two Reverend Bishops
Were those that went on each side of the Queen?
Stokeley and Gardiner, the one of Winchester,
Newly preferred from the Kings Secretary:
The other London.
He of Winchester
Is held no great good lover of the Archbishops,
The virtuous Cranmer.
All the Land knows that:
How ever, yet there is no great breach, when it comes
Cranmer will find a Friend will not shrink from him.
Who may that be, I pray you.
Thomas Cromwell,
A man in much esteem with the King, and truly
A worthy Friend. The King he's made him
Master of the Jewel House,
And one already of the Privy Council.
He will deserve more.
Yes without all doubt.
Come Gentlemen▪ ye shall go my way
Which is to th Court, and there ye shall be my Guests:
Something I can command. As I walk thither,
Isle tell ye more.
You may command vs Sir.
How do's your Grace?
O Griffith, sick to death:
My Legs like laden Branches bow to the Earth,
Willing to leave their burden: Reach a Chair,
So now (me thinks) I feel a little ease.
Did thou not tell me Griffith, as thou lead me,
That the great Child of Honour, Cardinal Wolsey
Was dead?
Yes Madam: but I thank your Grace
Out of the pain you suffered, gave no ear too't.
Prithee good Griffith, tell me how he dyed▪
If well, he stepped before me happily
For my example.
Well, the voice goes Madam,
For after the stout Earl Northumberland
Arrested him at Yo•ke, and brought him forward
As a man sorely tainted, to his Answer,
He fell sick suddenly, and grew so ill
He could not sit his Mule.
Alas poor man▪
At last, with easy Rodes, he came to Leicester,
Lodged in the Abbey; where the reverend Abbot
With all his Covent, honourably received him;
To whom he gave these words. O Father Abbot,
An old man, broken with the storms of State,
Is come to lay his weary bones among ye▪
Give him a little earth for Charity.
So went to bed; where eagerly his sickness
Pursued him still, and three nights after this,
About the hour of eight, which he himself
Foretold should be his last, full of Repentance,
Continual Meditations, Tears, and Sorrows,
He gave his Honours to the world again,
His blessed part to Heaven, and slept in peace.
So may he rest,
His Faults lye gently on him:
Yet thus far Griffith, give me leave to speak him,
And yet with Charity. He was a man
Of an unbounded stomach, ever ranking
Himself with Princes. One that by suggestion
Tied all the Kingdom. Symonie, was fair play,
His own Opinion was his Law. In the presence
He would say untruths, and be ever double
Both in his words, and meaning. He was never
(But where he meant to Ruin) pitiful.
His Promises, were as he then was, Mighty:
But his performance, as he is now, Nothing:
Of his own body he was ill, and gave
The Clergy ill example.
Noble Madam:
Men's evil manners, live in Brass, their Virtues
We write in Water. May it please your Highness
To hear me speak his good now?
Yes good Griffith,
I were malicious else.
This Cardinal,
Though from an humble Stock, undoubtedly
Was fashioned to much Honour. From his Cradle
He was a Scholar, and a ripe, and good one:
Exceeding wise, fair spoken, and persuading:
Lofty, and sour to them that loved him not:
But, to those men that sought him, sweet as Summer.
And though he were unsatisfied in getting,
(Which was a sin) yet in bestowing, Madam,
He was most Princely: Ever witness for him
Those twins of Learning, that he raised in you,
Ipswich and Oxford: one of which, fell with him,
Unwilling to out-liue the good that did it.
The other (though unfinished) yet so Famous,
So excellent in Art, and still so rising,
That Christendom shall ever speak his Virtue.
His Overthrow, heaped Happiness upon him:
For then, and not till then, he felt himself,
And found the Blessedness of being little▪
And to add greater Honours to his Age
Then man could give him; he dyed, fearing God.
After my death, I wish no other Herald,
No other speaker of my living Actions,
To keep mine Honour, from Corruption,
But such an honest Chronicler as Griffith.
Whom I most hated Living, thou hast made me
With thy Religious Truth, and Modesty,
(Now in his Ashes) Honour: Peace be with him.
Patience, be near me still, and set me lower.
I have not long to trouble thee. Good Griffith,
Cause the Musicians play me that sad note
I named my Knell; whilst I sit meditating
On that Celestial Harmony I go too.
She is asleep: Good wench, let's sit down quiet,
For fear we wake her. Softly, gentle Patience.
Spirits of peace, where are ye? Are ye all gone?
And leave me here in wretchedness, behind ye?
Madam, we are here.
It is not you I call for,
Saw ye none enter since I slept?
None Madam.
No? Saw you not even now a blessed Troop
Inuit me to a Banquet, whose bright faces
Cast thousand beams upon me, like the Sun?
They promised me eternal Happiness,
And brought me Garlands (Griffith) which I feel
I am not worthy yet to wear: I shall assuredly.
I am most joyful Madam, such good dreams
Possess your Fancy.
Bid the Music leave,
They are harsh and heavy to me.
Do you note
How much her Grace is altered on the sudden?
How long her face is drawn? How pale she looks,
And of an earthy cold? Mark her eyes?
She is going Wench. Pray, pray.
Heaven comfort her.
And't like your Grace—
You are a saucy Fellow,
Deserve we no more Reverence?
You are too blame,
Knowing she will not loose her wonted Greatness
To use so rude behaviour. Go too, kneel.
I humbly do entreat your Highness pardon,
My hast made me unmannerly. There is staying
A Gentleman sent from the King, to see you.
Admit him entrance Griffith. But this Fellow
Let me ne'er see again.
If my sight fail not,
You should be Lord Ambassador from the Emperor,
My Royal Nephew, and your name Capuchius.
Madam the same. Your Servant.
O my Lord,
The Times and Titles now are altered strangely
With me, since first you knew me.
But I pray you,
What is your pleasure with me?
Noble Lady,
First mine own service to your Grace, the next
The Kings request, that I would visit you,
Who grieves much for your weakness, and by me
Sends you his Princely Commendations,
And heartily entreats you take good comfort.
O my good Lord, that comfort comes too late,
It is like a Pardon after Execution;
That gentle Physic given in time, had cured me:
But now I am past all Comforts here, but Prayers.
How does his Highness?
Madam, in good health.
So may he ever do, and ever flourish,
When I shall dwell with Worms, and my poor name
Banished the Kingdom. Patience, is that Letter
I cause you write, yet sent away?
No Madam.
Sir, I most humbly pray you to deliver
This to my Lord the King.
Most willing Madam.
In which I have commended to his goodness
The Model of our chaste loves: his young daughter,
The dews of Heaven fall thick in Blessings on her,
Beseeching him to give her virtuous breeding.
She is young, and of a Noble modest Nature,
I hope she will deserve well; and a little
To love her for her Mothers sake, that loved him,
Heaven knows how dearly.
My next poor Petition,
Is, that his Noble Grace would have some pity
Upon my wretched women, that so long
Have followed both my Fortunes, faithfully,
Of which there is not one, I dare avow
(And now I should not lye) but will deserve
For Virtue, and true Beauty of the Soul,
For honesty, and decent Carriage
A right good Husband (let him be a Noble)
And sure those men are happy that shall have 'em.
The last is for my men, they are the poorest,
(But poverty could never draw 'em from me)
That they may have their wages, duly paid 'em,
And something over to remember me by.
If Heaven had pleased to have given me longer life
And able means, we had not parted thus.
These are the whole Contents, and good my Lord,
By that you love the dearest in this world,
As you wish Christian peace to souls departed,
Stand these poor peoples Friend, and urge the King
To do me this last right.
By Heaven I will,
Or let me loose the fashion of a man.
I thank you honest Lord. Remember me
In all humility unto his Highness:
Say his long trouble now is passing
Out of this world. Tell him in death I blessed him
(For so I will) mine eyes grow dim. Farewell
My Lord. Griffith farewell. Nay Patience,
Vou must not leave me yet. I must to bed,
Call in more women. When I am dead, good Wench,
Let me be used with Honour; strew me over
With Maiden Flowers, that all the world may know
I was a chaste Wife, to my Grave: Embalm me,
Then lay me forth (although vnqueen'd) yet like
A Queen, and Daughter to a King enter me.
I can no more.
It's one a clock Boy, is it not.
It hath struck.
These should be hours for necessities,
Not for delights: Times to repair our Nature
With comforting repose, and not for vs
To waste these times. Good hour of night Sir Thomas:
Whether so late?
Came you from the King, my Lord?
I did Sir Thomas, and left him at Primero
With the Duke of Suffolk.
I must to him too
Before he go to bed. Isle take my leave.
Not yet Sir Thomas Louell: what's the matter?
It seems you are in hast: and if there be
No great offence belongs too't, give your Friend
Some touch of your late business: Affairs that walk
(As they say Spirits do) at midnight, have
In them a wilder Nature, then the business
That seeks dispatch by day.
My Lord, I love you;
And durst commend a secret to your ear
Much weightier then this work. The Queens in Labour
They say in great Extremity, and feared
She'll with the Labour, end.
The fruit she goes with
I pray for heartily, that it may find
Good time, and live: but for the Stock Sir Thomas,
I wish it grubbed up now.
Me thinks I could
Cry the Amen, and yet my Conscience says
Shoe's a good Creature, and sweet-Ladie do's
Deserve our better wishes.
But Sir, Sir,
Hear me Sir Thomas, y' are a Gentleman
Of mine own way. I know you Wise, Religious,
And let me tell you, it will ne'er be well,
Twill not Sir Thomas Louell, tak't of me,
Till Cranmer, Cromwell, her two hands, and she
Sleep in their Graves.
Now Sir, you speak of two
The most remarked in the Kingdom: as for Cromwell,
Beside that of the Iewell-House, is made Master
Of the Rolls, and the Kings Secretary. Further Sir,
Stands in the gap and Trade of more Preferments,
With which the Lime will load him. The Archbishop
Is the Kings hand, and tongue, and who dare speak
One syllable against him?
Yes, yes, Sir Thomas,
There are that Date, and I my self have ventured
To speak my mind of him: and indeed this day,
Sir (I may tell it you) I think I have
Incensed the Lords of the Council, that he is
(For so I know he is, they know he is)
A most arch-heretic, a Pestilence
That does infect the Land: with which, they moved
Have broken with the King, who hath so far
Given care to our Complaint, of his great Grace,
And Princely Care, fore-seeing those fell Mischiefs,
Our Reasons laid before him, hath commanded
To morrow Morning to the Council Board
He be convented. He's a rank weed Sir Thomas,
And we must root him out. From your Affairs
I hinder you too long: Good night, Sir Thomas.
Many good nights, my Lord, I rest your servant.
Charles, I will play no more to night,
My minds not on it, you are too hard for me.
Sir, I did never win of you before.
But little Charles,
Nor shall not when my Fancies on my play.
Now Louel, from the Queen what is the News.
I could not personally deliver to her
What you commanded me, but by her woman,
I sent your Message, who returned her thanks
In the greatest hum•se, and desired your Highness
Most heartily to pr• 〈◊〉▪
What say 〈◊〉 Ha?
To pray for her? When• 〈◊〉 •e crying out?
So said her woman, and that her suffrance made
Almost each pang, a death.
Alas good Lady.
God safely quit her of her Burden, and
With gentle Travail, to the gladding of
Your Highness with an Heir.
It is midnight Charles,
Prithee to bed, and in thy Prayers remember
The estate of my poor Queen. Leave me alone▪
For I must think of that, which company
Would not be friendly too.
I wish your Highness
A quiet night, and my good Mistress will
Remember in my Prayers.
Charles good night.
Well Sir, what follows?
Sir, I have brought my Lord the Arch-byshop,
As you commanded me.
Ha? Canterbury?
I my good Lord.
It is true: where is he Denny?
He attends your Highness pleasure.
Bring him to Vs.
This is about that, which the Bishop spake,
I am happily come hither.
Avoid the Gallery.
Ha? I have said. Be gone.
What?
I am fearful: Wherefore frowns he thus?
It is his Aspect of Terror. Ell's not well.
How now my Lord?
You do desire to know wherefore
I sent for you.
It is my duty
To attend your Highness pleasure.
Pray you arise
My good and gracious Lord of Canterbury:
Come, you and I must walk a turn together:
I have News to tell you.
Come, come, give me your hand.
Ah my good Lord, I grieve at what I speak,
And am right sorry to repeat what follows.
I have, and most unwillingly of late
Heard many grievous. I do say my Lord
Grievous complaints of you; which being considered,
Have moved Vs, and our Council, that you shall
This Morning come before vs, where I know
You cannot with such freedom purge your self,
But that till further Trial, in those Charges
Which will require your Answer, you must take
Your patience to you, and be well contented
To make your house our Tower: you, a Brother of vs
It fits we thus proceed, or else no witness
Would come against you.
I humbly thank your Highness,
And am right glad to catch this good occasion
Most thoroughly to be winnowed, where my Chafe
And Corn shall fly asunder. For I know
There's none stands under more calumnious tongues,
Then I my self, poor man.
Stand up, good Canterbury,
Thy Truth, and thy Integrity is rooted
In vs thy Friend. Give me thy hand, stand up,
Prithee let's walk. Now by my Holydame,
What manner of man are you? My Lord, I looked
You would have given me your Petition, that
I should have tan some pains, to bring together
Your self, and your Accusers, and to have heard you
Without endurance further.
Most dread Liege,
The good I stand on, is my Truth and Honesty:
If they shall fail, I with mine Enemies
Will triumph o'er my person, which I weigh not,
Being of those Virtues vacant. I fear nothing
What can be said against me.
Know you not
How your state stands in the world, with the whole world?
Your Enemies are many, and not small; their practises
Must bear the same proportion, and not ever
The Justice and the Truth of the question carries
The dew of the Verdict with it; at what case
Might corrupt minds procure, Knaves as corrupt
To swear against you: Such things have been done.
You are Potently opposed, and with a Malice
Of as great Size. Wean you of better luck,
I mean in perjured Witness, then your Master,
Whose Minister you are, whiles here he lived
Upon this naughty Earth? Go too, go too,
You take a Precepit for no leap of danger,
And woe your own destruction.
God, and your Majesty
Protect mine innocence, or I fall into
The trap is laid for me.
Be of good cheer,
They shall no more prevail, then we give way too:
Keep comfort to you, and this Morning see
You do appear before them. If they shall chance
In charging you with matters, to commit you:
The best persuasions to the contrary
Fail not to use, and with what vehemence
The occasion shall instruct you. If entreaties
Will render you no remedy, this Ring
Deliver them, and your Appeal to vs
There make before them. Look, the goodman weeps:
He's honest on mine Honour. Gods blessed Mother,
I swear he is true-hearted, and a soul
None better in my Kingdom. Get you gone,
And do as I have bid you.
He he's strangled his Language in his tears.
Come back: what mean you?
Isle not come back, the tidings that I bring
Will make my boldness, manners. Now good Angels
Fly o'er thy Royal head, and shade thy person
Under their blessed wings.
Now by thy looks
I guess thy Message. Is the Queen delivered?
Say I, and of a boy.
I, I my Liege,
And of a lovely Boy: the God of heaven
Both now, and ever bless her: It is a Girl
Promises Boys hereafter. Sir, your Queen
Desires your Visitation, and to be
Acquainted with this stranger; it is as like you,
As Cherry, is to Cherry.
Louell.
Sir.
Give her an hundred Marks.
Isle to the Queen.
An hundred Marks? By this light, Isle ha more.
An ordinary Groom is for such payment.
I will have more, or scold it out of him.
Said I for this, the Girl was like to him? Isle
Have more, or else vnsay't: and now, while it is hot,
Isle put it to the issue.
I hope I am not too late, and yet the Gentleman
That was sent to me from the Council, prayed me
To make great hast. All fast? What means this? Hoe?
Who waits there? Sure you know me?
Yes, my Lord:
But yet I cannot help you.
Why?
Your Grace must weight till you be called for.
So.
This is a Peer of Malice: I am glad
I came this way so happily. The King
Shall understand it presently.
It is Buts.
The Kings Physician, as he past along
How earnestly he cast his eyes upon me:
Pray heaven he sound not my disgrace: for certain
This is of purpose laid by some that hate me,
(God turn their hearts, I never sought their malice)
To quench mine Honour; they would shame to make me
Wait else at door: a fellow Councellor
Among Boys, Grooms, and Lackeys.
But their pleasures
Must be fulfilled, and I attend with patience.
Isle show your Grace the strangest fight.
What's that Buts?
I think your Highness saw this many a day.
Body a me: where is it?
There my Lord:
The high promotion of his Grace of Canterbury,
Who holds his State at door amongst Purseuants,
Pages, and Foot-boyes.
Ha? It is he indeed.
Is this the Honour they doe one another?
It is well there's one aboue 'em yet; I had thought
They had parted so much honesty among 'em,
At least good manners; as not thus to suffer
A man of his Place, and so near our favour
To dance attendance on their Lordships pleasures,
And at the door too, like a Post with Packets:
By holy Mary (Butts) there's knavery;
Let 'em alone, and draw the Curtain close:
We shall hear more anon.
Speak to the business, M. Secretary;
Why are we met in Council?
Please your Honours,
The chief cause concerns his Grace of Canterbury.
He's he had knowledge of it?
Yes.
Who waits there?
Without my Noble Lords?
Yes.
My Lord Archbishop:
And he's done half an hour to know your pleasures.
Let him come in.
Your Grace may enter now.
My good Lord Archbishop, I'm very sorry
To sit here at this present, and behold
That Chair stand empty: But we all are men
In our own natures frail, and capable
Of our flesh, few are Angels; out of which frailty
And want of wisdom, you that best should teach vs,
Have misdemean'd your self, and not a little:
Toward the King first, then his Laws, in filling
The whole Realm, by your teaching &amp; your Chaplains
(For so we are informed) with new opinions,
Divers and dangerous; which are Heresies;
And not reformed, may prove pernicious.
Which Reformation must be sudden too
My Noble Lords; for those that tame wild Horses,
Pace 'em not in their hands to make 'em gentle;
But stop their mouths with stubborn Bits &amp; spur 'em,
Till they obey the manage. If we suffer
Out of our easiness and childish pity
To one mans Honour, this contagious sickness;
Farewell all Physic: and what follows then?
Commotions, vprores, with a general Taint
Of the whole State; as of late days our neighbours,
The upper Germany can dearly witness:
Yet freshly pitied in our memories.
My good Lords; Hitherto, in all the Progress
Both of my Life and Office, I have laboured,
And with no little study, that my teaching
And the strong course of my Authority,
Might-goe one way, and safely; and the end
Was ever to doe well: nor is there living,
(I speak it with a single heart, my Lords)
A man that more detests, more stirs against,
Both in his private Conscience, and his place,
Desacers of a public peace then I doe:
Pray Heaven the King may never find a heart
With less Allegiance in it. Men that make
Envy, and crooked malice, nourishment;
Dare bite the best. I doe beseech your Lordships,
That in this case of Justice, my Accusers,
Be what they will, may stand forth face to face,
And freely urge against me.
Nay, my Lord,
That cannot be; you are a Counsellor,
And by that virtue no man dare accuse you.
My Lord, because we have business of more mo∣meant,
We will be short with you. It is his Highness pleasure
And our consent, for better trial of you,
From hence you be committed to the Tower,
Where being but a private man again,
You shall know many dare accuse you boldly,
More then (I fear) you are provided for.
Ah my good Lord of Winchester: I thank you,
You are always my good Friend, if your will pass,
I shall both find your Lordship, Judge and Juror,
You are so merciful. I see your end,
It is my undoing. Love and meekness, Lord
Become a Churchman, better then Ambition:
Win straying Souls with modesty again,
Cast none away: That I shall clear my self,
Lay all the weight ye can upon my patience,
I make as little doubt as you doe conscience,
In doing daily wrongs. I could say more,
But reverence to your calling, makes me modest.
My Lord, my Lord, you are a Sectary,
That's the plain truth; your painted gloss discovers
To men that understand you, words and weakness.
My Lord of Winchester, y' are a little,
By your good favour, too sharpe; Men so Noble,
How ever faultly, yet should find respect
For what they have been: it is a cruelty,
To load a falling man.
Good M. Secretary,
I cry your Honour mercy; you may worst
Of all this Table say so.
Why my Lord?
Doe not I know you for a Favourer
Of this new Sect? ye are not sound.
Not sound?
Not sound I say.
Would you were half so honest:
Men's prayers then would seek you, not their fears.
I shall remember this bold Language.
Doe.
Remember your bold life too.
This is too much;
Forbear for shame my Lords.
I have done.
And I.
Then thus for you my Lord, it stands agreed
I take it, by all voices: That forthwith,
You be conveyed to the Tower a Prisoner;
There to remain till the Kings further pleasure
Be known unto vs: are you all agreed Lords.
And by that verte no man dare accuse you.
And by that virtue no man dare accuse you.
We are.
Is there no other way of mercy,
But I must needs to the Tower my Lords?
What other,
Would you expect? You are strangely troublesome:
Let some of the Guard be ready there.
For me?
Must I go like a Traitor thither?
Receive him,
And see him safe in the Tower.
Stay good my Lords,
I have a little yet to say. Look there my Lords,
By virtue of that Ring, I take my cause
Out of the gripes of cruel men, and give it
To a most Noble Judge, the King my Moister.
This is the Kings Ring.
It is no counterfeit.
'Ts the right Ring, by Heaven: I told ye all,
When we first put this dangerous stone a rolling,
'Twold fall upon our selves.
Doe you think my Lords
The King will suffer but the little finger
Of this man to be vexed?
Tic now too certain;
How much more is his Life in value with him?
Would I were fairly out on it.
My mind gave me,
In seeking tales and Informations
Against this man, whose honesty the Devil
And his Disciples only envy at,
Ye blew the fire that burns ye: now have at ye.
Dread Sovereign,
How much are we bound to Heaven,
In daily thanks; that gave vs such a Prince;
Not only good and wise, but most religious:
One that in all obedience, makes the Church
The chief aim of his Honour, and to strengthen
That holy duty out of dear respect,
His Royal self in Judgment comes to hear
The cause betwixt her, and this great offender.
You were ever good at sudden Commendations,
Bishop of Winchester. But know I come not
To hear such flattery now, and in my presence
They are too thin, and base to hide offences,
To me you cannot reach. You play the Spaniel,
And think with wagging of your tongue to win me:
But whatsoere thou take me for; I'm sure
Thou hast a cruel Nature and a bloody.
Good man sit down: Now let me see the proudest
Hee, that dares most, but wag his finger at thee.
By all that's holy, he had better starve,
Then but once think his place becomes thee not.
May it please your Grace;—
No Sir, it doe's not please me,
I had thought, I had had men of some understanding,
And wisdom of my Council; but I find none:
Was it discretion Lords, to let this man,
This good man (few of you deserve that Title)
This honest man, wait like a lousy Foot-boy
At Chamber door? and one, as great as you are?
Why, what a shame was this? Did my Commission
Bid ye so far forget your selves? I gave ye
Power, as he was a Counsellour to try him,
Not as a Groom: There's some of ye, I see,
More out of Malice then Integrity,
Would try him to the utmost, had ye mean,
Which ye shall never have while I live.
Thus far
My most dread Sovereign, may it like your Grace,
To let my tongue excuse all. What was purposed
Concerning his Imprisonment, was rather
(If there be faith in men) meant for his Trial,
And fair purgation to the world then malice,
I'm sure in me.
Well, well my Lords respect him,
Take him, and use him well; hoe's worthy of it.
I will say thus much for him, if a Prince
May be beholding to a Subject; I
Am for his love and service, so to him.
Make memo more ado, but all embrace him;
Be friends for shame my Lords: My Lord of Canterbury
I have a Suite which you must not deny me.
That is, a fair young Maid that yet wants Baptism,
You must be Godfather, and answer for her.
The greatest Monarch now alive may glory
In such an honour: how may I deserve it,
That am a poor and humble Subject to you?
Come, come my Lord, you'd spare your spoons; You shall have two noble Partners with you: the old Duchess of Norfolk, and Lady Marquess Dorset? will these please you?
Once more my Lord of Winchester, I charge you
Embrace, and love this man.
With a true heart,
And Brother; love I doe it.
And let Heaven
Witness how dear, I hold this Confirmation.
Good Man, those joyful tears show thy true hearts,
The common voice I see is verified
Of thee, which says thus: Doe my Lord of Canterbury
A shrewd turn, and hoe's your friend for ever:
Come Lords, we trifle time away: I long
To have this young one made a Christian.
As I have made ye one Lords, one remain:
So I grow stronger, you more Honour gain.
You'll leave your noise anon ye▪ Rascals: doe you take the Court for Parish Garden: ye rude Slaves, leave your gaping:
Good M. Porter I belong to the Larder.
Belong to the Gallows, and be hanged ye Rogue: Is this a place to roar in? Fetch me a dozen Crab-tree staves, and strong ones; these are but switches to 'em: Isle scratch your heads; you must be seeing Christenings? Do you look for Ale, and Cakes here, you rude Raskalls?
Pray Sir be patient; it is as much impossible,
Unless wee sweep 'em from the door with Cannons,
To scatter 'em, as it is to make 'em sleep
On May-day Morning, which will never be:
We may as well push against Powles as stir 'em.
How got they in, and be hanged?
Alas I know not, how gets the Tide in?
As much as one sound Cudgel of four foot,
(You see the poor remainder) could distribute,
I made no spare Sir.
You did nothing Sir.
I am not Simpson, nor Sir Guy, nor Colebrand,
To mow 'em down before me: but if I spared any
That had a head to hit, either young or old,
He or she, Cuckold or Cuckold-maker:
Let me ne'er hope to see a Chine again,
And that I would not for a Cow, God save her.
Do you hear M. Porter?
I shall be with you presently, good M. Puppy,
Keep the door close Sirha.
What would you have me doe?
What should you doe,
But knock 'em down by the dozens? Is this More fields to muster in? Or have wee some strange Indian with the great Tool, come to Court, the women so besiege vs? Bless me, what a fry of Fornication is at door? On my Christian Conscience this one Christening will beget a thousand, here will bee Father, God-father, and all to∣gether.
The Spoons will be the bigger Sir: There is a fellow somewhat near the door, he should be a Brasi∣er by his face, for of my conscience twenty of the Dog-dayes now reign in's Nose; all that stand about him are under the Line, they need no other penance: that Fire-Drake did I hit three times on the head, and three times was his Nose discharged against me; hee stands there like a Morter-piece to blow vs. There was a Habberda∣shers Wife of small wit, near him, that railed upon me, till her pinck'd porringer fell off her head, for kindling such a combustion in the State. I mist the Meteor once, and hit that Woman, who cried out Clubs, when I might see from far, some forty Truncheoners draw to her succour, which were the hope of the Strond where she was quartered; they fell on, I made good my place; at length they came to the broom staff to me, I defied 'em still, when suddenly a File of Boys behind 'em, loose shot, delivered such a shower of Pebbles, that I was fine to draw mine Honour in, and let 'em win the Work, the Devil was amongst 'em I think surely.
These are the youths that thunder at a Playhouse, and fight for bitten Apples, that no Audience but the tribulation of Tower Hill, or the Limbs of Limehouse, their dear Brothers are able to endure. I have some of 'em in Limbo Patrum, and there they are like to dance these three days; besides the running Banquet of two Beadles, that is to come.
Mercy of me: what a Multitude are here?
They grow still too; from all Parts they are coming,
As if we kept a Fair here? Where are these Porters?
These lazy knaves? Y' have made a fine hand fellows?
Theres a trim rabble let in: are all these
Your faithful friends of the Suburbs? We shall have
Great store of room no doubt, left for the Ladies,
When they pass back from the Christening?
And't please your Honour,
We are but men; and what so many may doe,
Not being torn a pieces, we have done:
An Army cannot rule 'em.
As I live,
If the King blame me for it; Isle lay ye all
By the heals, and suddenly: and on your heads
Clap round Fines for neglect: y' are lazy knaves,
And here ye lye baiting of Bombards, when
Ye should doe Service. Hark the Trumpets sound,
The are come already from the Christening,
Go break among the press, and find away out
To let the Troop pass fairly; or Isle find
A Marshallsey, shall hold ye play these two Months.
Make way there, for the Princess.
You great fellow,
Stand close up, or Isle make your head ache.
You in the Chamblet, get up of the rail,
Isle peck you o'er the pales esse.
Heaven
From thy endless goodness, send prosperous life,
Long and ever happy, to the high and Mighty
Princess of England Elizabeth.
And to your Royal Grace, &amp; the good Queen,
My Noble Partners, and my self thus pray
All comfort, joy in this most gracious Lady,
Heaven ever laid up to make Parents happy,
May hourly fall upon ye.
Thank you good Lord Archbishop:
What is her Name?
Elizabeth.
Stand up Lord,
With this Kiss, take my Blessing: God protect thee,
Into whose hand, I give thy Life.
Amen.
My Noble Gossips, y' have been too Prodigal;
I thank ye heartily: So shall this Lady,
When she he's so much English.
Let me speak Sir,
For Heaven now bids me; and the words I utter,
Let none think Flattery; for they'll find 'em Truth.
This Royal Infant, Heaven still move about her;
Though in her Cradle; yet now promises
Upon this Land a thousand thousand Blessings,
Which Time shall bring to ripeness: She shall be,
(But few now living can behold that goodness)
A Pattern to all Princes living with her,
And all that shall succeed: Saba was never
More covetous of Wisdom, and fair Virtue
Then this pure Soul shall be. All Princely Graces
That mould up such a mighty Piece as this is,
With all the Virtues that attend the good,
Shall still be doubled on her. Truth shall Nurse her,
Holy and Heavenly thoughts still Counsel her:
She shall be loved and feared. Her own shall bless her;
Her Foes shake like a Field of beaten Corn,
And hang their heads with sorrow:
Good grows with her.
In her days, Every Man shall eat in safety,
Under h•s own Vine what he plants; and sing
The merry Songs of Peace to all his Neighbours.
God shall be truly known, and those about her,
From her shall read the perfect way of Honour,
And by those claim their greatness; not by Blood.
Nor shall this peace sleep with her: But as when
The Bird of Wonder dyes, the Maiden Phoenix,
Her Ashes new create another Heir,
As great in admiration as her self.
So shall she leave her Blessedness to One,
(When Heaven shall call her from this cloud of darkness)
Who, from the sacred Ashes of her Honour
Shall Star-like rise, as great in fame as she was,
And so stand fixed. Peace, Plenty, Love, Truth, Terror,
That were the Servants to this chosen Infant,
Shall then be his, and like a Vine grow to him;
Where ever the bright Sun of Heaven shall shine,
His Honour, and the greatness of his Name,
Shall be, and make new Nations. He shall flourish,
And like a Mountain Cedar, reach his branches,
To all the Plains about him: Our Childrens Children
Shall see this, and bless Heaven.
Thou speak wonders.
She shall be to the happiness of England,
An aged Princess; many days shall see her,
And yet no day without a deed to Crown it.
Would I had known no more: But she must dye,
She must, the Saints must have her; yet a Virgin,
A most unspotted Lily shall she pass
To the ground, and all the World shall morn her.
O Lord Archbishop
Thou hast made me now a man, never before
This happy Child, did I get any thing.
This Oracle of comfort, he's so pleased me,
That when I am in Heaven, I shall desire
To see what this Child does, and praise my Maker.
I thank ye all. To you my good Lord Mayor,
And you good Brethren, I am much beholding:
I have received much Honour by your presence,
And ye shall find me thankful. Lead the way Lords,
Ye must all see the Queen, and she must thank ye,
She will be sick else. This day, no man think
'Has business at his house; for all shall stay:
This Little-One shall make it Holy-day.
Tic ten to one, this Play can never please
All that are here: Some come to take their case,
And sleep an Act or two; but those we fear
W' have frighted with our Tumpets: so it is clear,
They'll say tic nought. Others to hear the City
Abused extremely, and to cry that's witty,
Which wee have not done neither; that I fear
All the expected good w' are like to hear.
For this Play at this time, is only in
The merciful construction of good women,
For such a one we showed em: If they smile,
And say twill doe; I know within a while,
All the best men are ours; for it is ill hap,
If they hold, when their Ladies bid 'em clap.

