DAres she despise me thus? me that with spoil
And hazardous exploits, full sixteen years
Have led (as hand-maides) Fortune, Victory
Whom the Maltezi call my servitors?
Tempests I have subdued, and fought 'em calm,
Out-lightened lightning in my Chilvalry;
Rid (tame as patience) billows that kicked heaven,
Whistled enraged Bores till his gusts
Were grown so gentle, that he seemed to sigh,
Because he could not show the air my keel,
And yet I cannot conquer her bright eyes,
Which though they blaze both comfort, and invite
Neither by force, nor fraud pass through her ear
(Whose guard it only blushing Innocence)
To take the least possession of her heart,
Did I attempt her with a thred-bare name—unnapt with meritorious actions,
She might with colour dis-allow my suit:
But by the honour of this Christian cross
(In blood of Infidels so often died)
Which mine own soul and sword hath fixed here
And neither favour, nor births privilege
Oriana shall confess, although she be
Valetias Sister our Grand-Master, here
The wages of scorned Love is baneful hate, 
And if I rule not her, i'll rule her fate.
Rocca, my trusty Servant, welcome.
Sir,
I wish my news deserved it: haplesse I
That being loved, and trusted, fail to bring
The loving answer that you doe expect.
Why speak thou from me: thy pleased eyes send forth
Beams brighter then the star that ushers day,
Thy smiles, restore sick expectation.
I bring you Sir, her smiles, not mine.
Her smiles?
Why they are presents for Kings eldest Sons,
Great Solyman that wearies his hot eyes,
But to peruse his decked Ceraglio,
When from the number of his Concubines
He chooses one for that night, in his pride
Of them, wives, wealth, is not so rich as I
In this one smile, from Oriana sent.
Sir, fare ye well.
Oh Rocca! thou art wise,
And would not have the torrent of my joy
Ruin me headlong; aptly thou conceiv'st
If one reviving smile can raise me thus,
What trances will the sweet words which thou bring
Cast me into? I felt (my dearest friend,
No more my Servant) when I employed thee
That knew to look, and speak as Lovers should,
And carry faithfully thy Masters sighs,
That it must work some heat in her cold heart,
And all my labours now come fraughted home
With ten fold prize.
Will you yet hear me?
Yes,
But take heed (gentle Rocca,) that thou dost
Tenderly by degrees assault mine ears
With her consent, now to embrace my love,
For thou well know I have been so plundg'd, so torn
With her resolved reject, and neglect:
That to report her soft acceptance now,
Will stupefy sense in me, if not kill:
Why show thou this distemper?
Draw your sword,
And when I with my breath have blasted you,
Kill me with it:
I bring you smiles of pity, not affection:
For such she sent.
Oh! can she pity me?
Of all the paths lead to a women's love,
Pittie's the straightest.
Waken Sir, and know
That her contempt (if you can name it so)
Continues still: she bids you throw your Pearl
Into strong streams, and hope to turn them so,
Ere her to foul dishonour; write your plaints
In rocks of Coral grow'n above the Sea,
Them hope to soften to compassion,
Or change their modest blush to love sick pale,
Ere work her to your impious requests;
All your loose thoughts she chides you home again,
But with such calm behaviour, and mild looks,
She gentlier denies then others grant,
For just as others love, so doth she hate:
She says, that by your order you are bound
From marrying ever, and much marvels then
You would thus violate her and your own faith,
That being the virgin you should now protect,
Hitherto she professes she has concealed
Your lustful Batteries, but the next she vows,
(In open Hall, before the honoured cross
And her great brother) she will quite disclose
Calling for justice, to your utter shame.
Hence find the Blackamoor that waits upon her,
Bring her unto me, she doth love me yet,
And I must her now, at least seem to do:
Cupped, thy brands that glow thus in my veins,
I will with blood extinguish—ar't not gone?
Shall my desires, like beggars, waite at door
Whilst any others revel in her breast?
Sweat on my spirits: know thou tricked up toy,
My love's a violent flood, where thou art fallen, 
Playing with which tide you would bin gently tossed,
But crossing it, thou art o'er whelmed, and lost.
Monsieur, good day.
Good morrow valiant Knight,
What, are you for this great solemnity
This morn intended?
What solemnity?
The investing of the Martial Spaniard,
Peter Gomera, with our Christian Badge.
And young Miranda, the Italian,
Both which with wondrous prowess, and great luck
Have dared and done for Malta, such high feats,
That not one Fort in it, but rings their names
As loud as any mans.
As any mans?
Why, we have fought for Malta.
Yes Mountferrat.
No bold Knight ever past you: but we wear
The dignity of Christians on our breasts,
And have a long time triumphed for our conquests;
These conquered a long time, not triumphed yet;
Astorius, you are a most indulgent Knight,
Detracting from your self, to add to others,
You know this title is the period
To all our labours, the extremity
Of that tall pyramid, where honour hangs,
Which we with sweat and agony have reached,
And should not then so easily impart
So bright a wreath to every cheap desert.
How is this French man changed Astorius?
Some sullen discontent possesses him,
That makes him envy, what he heretofore
Did most ingenuously but emulate.
Oh furious desire, how like a whirlwind
Thou hurriest me beyond mine honours point?
Out of my heart, base lust, or heart, I vow
Those flames that heat thee thus, I'll burn thee in.
Do' ye observe him?
What news of the Dane,
That valiant Captain Norandine?
He fights ••ill,
In view of the Town; he plays the devil with 'em,
And they the Turks with him.
They are well met then, it were sin to sever'em.
Pish—woman. —Memory —
Would one of ye would eave me:
Six fresh Galleys
I in St. Angelo from the promontory
This morn discride, making a Girdle for him,
But our great Master doth intend relief
This present meeting: will you walk along?
Hunch—I have read Ladies enjoyed, have by
The gulphes of worthiest men, buried their names,
Their former valour, bounty, beauty, virtue,
And sent 'em stinking to untimely graves.
I that cannot enjoy, by her disdain,
Am like to prove as wretched; woman then
Checking or granting, is the grave of men.
He's saying of his Prayers sure.
Will you go Sir?
I cry you mercy: I am so transported
(Your pardon, noble Brothers) with a business
That doth concern all Malta, that I am
(Anon you'll heare't) almost blind, and deaf.
Lust neither sees nor hears ought but it self:
But I will follow instantly: your cross.
Not mine.
Nor mine: it is yours.
Cast. Good morrow brother. 
White innocent sign, that dost abhor to dwell
So near the dim thoughts of this troubled breast,
And grace these graceless projects of my heart. 
Yet I must wear thee to protect my crimes,
If not for conscience, for hypocrisy,
Some Churchmen so wear Cassoks: Oh my
My Pearl, that scorns a stain! I much repent
All my neglects: Let me Ixion like,
Embrace my black cloud since my Iuno is
So wrathful, and averse; thou art more soft
And full of dalliance then the fairest flesh,
And far more loving.
I, you say so now,
But like a property, when I have served
Your turns, You'll, cast me off, or hang me up
For a sign, somewhere.
May my life then forsake me
Of my expected bliss, be cast to hell.
My tongue Sir, cannot lisp to meet you so,
Nor my black Cheek put on a feigned blush,
To make me seem more modest then I am.
This ground-worke, will not bear adulterate red,
Nor artificial white, to cozen love.
These dark locks, are not purchased, nor these teeth,
For every night, they are my bed-fellows;
No bath, no blanching water, smoothing oils,
Doth mend me up; and yet Mountferrat, know,
I am as full of pleasure in the touch
As ere a white faced puppet of 'em all,
Juicy, and firm; unfledge 'em of their tyres,
Their wires, their partlets, pins, and periwigs,
And they appear like bald coots, in the nest;
I can as blithly work in my loves bed,
And deck thy fair neck, with these Jetty chains,
Sing thee asleep, being wearied, and refreshed,
With the same organ, steal sleep off again.
Oh my black swan, silkner then Signets plush,
Sweeter then is the sweet of Pomander,
Breathed like curled Zephyrus, cooling Lymon-trees,
Straight as young pines, or Cedars in the grove,
Quickly descend lovers best Canopy,
Still night, for Zanthia doth enamour me
Beyond all continuance; perpetrate (dear wench)
What thou hast promised, and I vow by heaven
Malta, I'll leave in it, my honours here,
And in some other Country (Zanthia) make
My wife, and my best fortune.
From this hope,
Here is an answer to that Letter, which
I lately showed you sent from Tripoly,
By the great Bash, which importunes her
Love unto him, and treachery to the Island,
Which will she undertake, by Mahomet
The Turk there vows, on his blessed Alcharon,
Marriage unto her: this the Master knows,
But is resolved of her integrity
(As well he may) sweet Lady yet for love,
For love of thee Mountferrat, (Oh! what Chains
Of deity, or duty can hold love?)
I have this answer framed, so like her hand
As if it had bin moulded of: returning
The Bashes Letter safe into her pocket;
What you will do with it, your self best knows,
Farewell, keep my true heart, keep true your vows. 
Till I be dust, my Zanthia; be confirmed.
Sparrows, and Doves, sit coupling twixt thy Lips,
It is not love, but strong Libidinous will
That triumphs o'er me, and to satiate that,
What difference twixt this Moore, and her fair Dame?
Night makes their hews alike, their use is so,
Whose hand so subtle, he can colours name,
If he do wink, and touch 'em: lust being blind,
Never in women did distinction find. 
But in faith dost thou think my Lady was never in love?
I rather think she was ever in love: in perfect charity.
I mean, with all the world.
A most christian answer I promise you: but I mean in
Love with a man.
With a man? what else? would have her in love with a beast?
You are somewhat quick: but if she were, it were no
President; did, you never read of Europe the fair, that leapt
A bull, that leapt the Sea, that swoom to land, and then leapt her?
Oh heavens, a bull?
Yes, a white bull.
Lord, how could she sit him? where did she hold?
Why, by the horn: since which time, no woman (almost) is
Contented, till she have a horn of her own, to hold by.
Thou art very knavish.
And thou very foolish: but sirah, why dost not thou marry?
Because I would be no mans looking-glasse?
As how? 
As thus, there is no Wife, if she be good, and true, will honour, and obey, but must reflect the true coun∣tenance of her husband upon him; if he look sad up∣on her, she must not look merrily upon him: if he look merrily, she must not sorrowfully, else she is a false glass, and fit for nothing but breaking; his anger must be her discontent; his pleasure, her delight: if he weep, she must cry: if he laugh, she must show her teeth; if hee bee sick, she must not bee in health; if hee eat Cawdles, she must eat pottage, she must have no proper passion of her own; and is not this a tie∣rany?
Yes, in faith, Marriage may well be called a yoke; Wives then are but like superficial lines in Geometry, that have no proper motion of their own, but as their bodies their husbands move; yet I know some Wives, that are never freely merry, nor truly pleased, but when they are farthest of their husbands.
That's because the Moon governs 'em which hath most light and shines brightest, the more remote it is from the Sun; and contrary is more sullen, dim, and shows least splendour, when it is nearest.
But if I were to marry I would marry a fair effeminate fool.
Why?
Because I would lead the blind whether I list.
And I the wisest man I could get for money, because I had rather follow the cleer-sighted: bless me from a husband That sales by his Wives compass?
Why?
Why, tic ten to one but she breaks his head in her youth, and when she is old she'll never leave till she has broke his back too —
But what scurvy Knight have you here in Malta, &amp;c.
Hist, wenches: my Lady calls, she's entering The Terrace, to see the show.
Oh black pudding.
My little labour in vain.
But what scurvy Knights have we here in Malta, that when they are dubbed take their oath of allegiance to live poor, and chastely ever after?
Faith many Knights in other Nations (I have heard) are as poor as ours: marry where one of 'em has taken the Oath of chastity, we want a new Columbm to find out.
Are you there Lady?
Thou art a naughty man,
Heaven mend thee.
Our great meeting princely brothers,
Ye holy soldiers of the Christian Cross,
Is to relieve our Captain Norandine,
Now fighting for Valet, with the Turk,
A valiant Gentleman, a noble Dane
As ere the Country bred, endangerd now
By fresh supply of head-bound Infidels.
Much means, much blood this warlike Dane hath spent
To advance our flag, above their horned moons,
And oft hath brought in profitable conquest:
We must not see him perish in our view:
How far off fight they?
Sir, within a League.
Tic well: our next occasion of conventing
Are these too gentlemen, standing in your sight.
(Ye noble props of Malta) royally
Descended are they both, valiant as war,
Miranda, and Gomera, full ten years
They have served this Island, perfected exploits
Matchless, and infinite, they are honest, wise,
Not empty of one ornament of man:
Most eminent agents were they in that slaughter
That great marvelous slaughter of the Turks,
Before St. Elm, where five and twenty thousand
Fell, for five thousand of our Christians:
These ripe considerations moving us
(Having had your allowance on their worthies)
Here we would call 'em to our Brotherhood;
If any therefore can their manners tax,
Their faith, their chastity, any part of life,
Let 'em speak now.
None do's.
None can, great Master.
The dignity then dignify, by them
Is their reward: tender Miranda first
(Because he is to succour Norandine)
Our sacred Robe of Knight-hood, our white Cross,
The holy cognisance of him we serve,
The sword, the spurs.
Grave, and most honoured Master,
With humble duty, and my souls best thanks
To you, and all this famous Conventicle,
Let me, with modesty refuse acceptance
Of this high order: I (alas) am yet
Unworthy, and incapable of such honour,
That merit, which with favour you enlarge
Is far, far short, of this proposed reward.
Who take upon him such a charge as this,
Must come with pure thoughts, and a gatherd mind
That time, nor all occasions ever may
After disperse, or stain; did this title here
Of Knighthood, ask no other ornaments
Then other countries glittering show, poor pride,
A jingling spur, a feather, a white hand,
A frizzled hair, powdered, perfumes, and lust,
Drinking sweet wines, surfeits, and ignorance,
Rashly, and easily should I venture on it,
But this requires an other kind of man.
A staid, and mature judgement; speak on sir.
May it please you then to allow me some small time
To rectify my self, for that high seat,
Or give my reasons to the contrary.
Ith mean space, to dismiss me to the aid
Of Norandine: my Ships ride in the bay
Ready to disembogue, tackel'd, and mand
Even to my wishes.
His request
Is fair, and honest.
At your pleasure go.
I humbly take my leave of all: of you
My noble friend Mountferrat; gracious Mistress,
Oh that auspicious smile doth arm your soldier,
Who fights for those eyes, and this sacred Cross,
Can neither meet sad accident, nor loss. 
The mighty Master of that Livory,
Conduct thee safely to these eyes again.
Blows the wind that way?
Equally beloved,
Equally meriting, Gomera, you
Without excuse receive that dignity:
Which our provincial chapter hath decreed you.
Great Master of Jerusalems Hospital,
From whence to Rhodes this blessed Fraternity
Was driven, but now among the Maltois stands,
Long may it flourish, whilst Gomera serves it,
But dares not enter farther.
This is Orange.
What do ye object?
Nothing against it, but my self (fair Knights)
I may not wear this Robe.
Express your reasons;
Doth any hid sin gore your conscience?
Are you unsteadfast in Religion?
Or do you intend to forsake Malta now,
And visit your own Country, fruitful Spain.
Never good sir.
Then explicate your thoughts.
This then: I should be perjurd to receive it,
Once in Malita, your next City here,
When I was younger, read I the decrees
Touching this point, being ambitious then
To approach it once, none but a Gentleman
Can be admitted.
Thats no obstacle
In you.
I should be sorry, that were it
No married man.
You never felt that yoke.
None, that hath bin contracted.
Were you ever?
Nor married, nor contracted, none that ever
Hath vowed his love to any woman kind,
Or finds that secret fire within his thoughts:
Here I am cast, this Article my heart
Objects against the title of my fame,
I am in love; laugh not: though time hath set
Some wrinkles in this face, and these curled locks
Will shortly die into an other hew,
Yet, yet I am in love: (in faith you smile)
What age, what sex, or what profession
Divine, or humane, from the man that cries
For arms in the high way, to him that sings
At the high Altar, and doth sacrifice.
Can truly say he knows not what is Love?
Tic honestly professed; with whom Gomera?
Name the Lady, that with all advantage
We may advance your suit.
But will you sir?
Now by our holy rock were it our sister:
Spaniard, I hold thee worthy, freely name her.
Be master of your word: it is she sir,
The matchless Oriana.
Come down Lady,
You have made her blush, let her consent, I will
Make good my oath.
Is it so? stay: I do love
So tenderly Gomera, your bright flame,
As not to suffer your perdition.
What means Mountferrat?
This whole auberge hath 
(A Guard upon this Lady) wonder not,
'Tane public notice of the Bassaes love
Of Tripoli unto her, and consented
She should return this answer, as he writ
For her conversion, and betraying Malta,
She should advise him betray Tripoli,
And turning Christian, he should many her.
All this was so.
How weakly do's this court then
Send Vessels forth to Sea, to guard the Land
Taking such special care to save one Bark,
Or strive to add famed men unto our cloak,
When they lurk in our bosoms would subvert
This State, and us, presuming on their blood,
And partial indulgence to their sex?
Who can this be?
Your Sister, great Ʋaletta,
Which thus I prove: demand the Bassa's Letter.
Tic here, nor from this pocket hath bin moved
Nor answered, nor perused by—
Do not swear
Cast not away your fair soul, to your treason
Add not foul perjury: is this your hand?
Tic very like it.
May it please the Master,
Confer these Letters, and then read her Answer,
Which I have intercepted; pardon me
Reverend Ʋaletta, that am made the means
To punish this most beauteous Treachery,
Even in your Sister, since in it I save
Malta from ruin: I am bolder in it,
Because it is so palpable, and withal
Know our great Master to this Country firm.
As was the Roman Marcus, who spared not
As dear a sister public cause.
I am amazed; attend me.
Let you forces by the next even be ready, my brother feasts, then; put in at St. Michaels, the ascent at that Port is easiest; the Keys of the Castle, you shall receive at my hands: that possessed, you are Lord of Malta, and may soon destroy all by fire, then which I am better, till I embrace you,
From this time let me never read again.
Tic certain her hand.
This Letter too
So close kept by her self, could not be answered
To every period thus, but by her self.
Sir, hear me.
Peace, thou fair sweet bank of flowers,
Under whose beauty Scorpions lie, and kill;
VVert thou a kin to me, in some new name
Dearer then sister, mother, or all blood,
I would not hear thee speak: bear her to prison,
So gross is this, it needs no formal course,
Prepare thy self, to morrow thou shalt die.
I die a martyr then, and a poor maid,
Almost in faith as inocent as borne,
Thou know thou art wicked, Frenchman, heaven forgive thee. 
This scene is strangely turned.
Yet can nature be
So dead in me? I would my charge were off,
Mountferrat should perceive my sister had
A brother would not live to see her dye
Unfought for; since the statutes of our state
Allow (in case of accusations)
A Champion to defend a Ladies truth.
Peter Gomera, thou hast lost thy wife,
Death pleads a pre-contract.
I have lost my Tongue,
My sense, my heart, and every faculty:
Mountferrat, go not up: with reverence
To our great master, and this consistory
(I have considered it, it cannot be)
Thou art a villain, and a forger,
A blood-sucker of innocence, an hypocrite,
A most unworthy wearer of our Cross;
To make which good take (if thou dare) that gage,
And armed at all points like a Gentleman
Meet me to morrow morning, where the master,
And this fraternity shall design, where I
Will cram this slander back into thy throat,
And with say swords point thrust it to thy heart,
The very nest where lust and slander breeds.
Pardon my passion: I will tear those spurs
Off from thy heels, and stik'em in thy front
As a marked villain.
This I looked not for:
Ten times more villainy, I return my gage,
And crave the Law of Arms.
Tic that I crave.
It cannot be denied.
Do not I know
With thousand gifts, and importunacies
Thou often hast solicited this Lady
(Contrary to thy oath of chastity)
Who ne'er disclosing this thy hot reignd lust,
Yet tender to prevent a public scandal,
That Christendom might justly have imposed
Upon this holy institution.
Thou now hast drawn this practise against her life
To quit her charity.
Spaniard, thou least.
No more Gomora, thou art granted combat,
And you Mountferrat must prepare against
To morrow morning in the valley here
Adjoining to St. •eorges Port: a Lady
In case of life against whom one witness comes
May have her champion.
And who hath most right 
With, or against our sister, speed in fight.
Rocca, the first news of Miranda service
Let me have notice of.
You shall: The Moore
VVaytes you without.
Admit her, ha, ha, ha.
Oh, how my fancies run at tilt! Gomera
Loves Oriana; she, as I should guess,
Affects Miranda; these are two deer friends,
As firm, and full of fire, as steel and flint.
To make 'em so now, one against the other: En. Zanthia
Stay, let me like it better, Zanthia;
First tell me this, did Don Gomera use
To give his visits to your Mistress?
Yes, and Miranda too: but severally.
Which did she most apply to?
Faith to neither:
Yet infinitely I have heard her praise 'em both,
And in that manner, that were both one man
I think she was in love with it.
Another Letter you must frame for me
Instantly, in your Ladies Character,
To such a purpose as I'll tell thee strait,
Go in, and stay me: go my Tinder-box,
Cross lines i'll cross; so, so: my after-game
I must play better: woman, I will spread
My vengeance over Malta, for thy sake:
Spaniard, Italian, like my steel and stone,
I'll knock you thus together, were ye out
To light my dark deeds, whilst I seem precise,
And wink to save the sparkles from mind eyes.
How is it Sir?
Pray set me down; I cool,
And my, wounds smart.
I hope yet
Though there be many, ther's none dangerous.
I know not, nor I care not much, I got 'em,
Like a too forward fool; but I hope the Surgeons
Will take an order I shall not leave 'em so
I make the rogues more work then all the Island,
And yet they give me the hardest words for my money.
I am glad ye are so sprightly: ye fought bravely
Go call the Surgeons Soldiers: wondrous nobly
Upon my life, I have not seen such valour,
Maintained so long, and to so large a ruin,
The odds so strong against ye.
I thank ye,
And thank ye for your help, your timely succour.
By the mas, it came in the nick sir, and well handled;
Stoutly, and strongly handled: we had duckt else,
My Turk had Turk'd me else: but he has well paid for it.
Why what a Sign for an Almanac he has made me?
I am glad to find ye here sir, of necessity
I must have come aboard else; and brave Captain
We all joy much in your fair victory,
And all the Island speaks your valour nobly.
Have ye brought the Turk in that ye took?
He rides there.
If he were out again, the devil should bring him.
He has truly circumcised me.
I have a business
Which much concerns ye, presently concerns ye;
But not this place nor people: pray ye draw off sir,
For tic of that weight to ye.
Isle walt on ye,
I must crave leave a while: my care dwells with ye,
And I must wait my self.
Your servant sir.
Believe I shall, and what my love can minister;
Keep your stout heart still.
That's my best Physician.
And I shall keep your fame fair. 
Ye are too Noble.
A brave young fellow, of a matchless spirit;
He brought me off like thunder, charged, and boarded,
As if he had been shot to save mine honour:
And when my fainting men tired with their labour,
And lack of blood gave to the Turk assurance
The day was his; when I was cut in shreds thus,
And not a corn of Powder left to bless us,
Then flew his Sword in, then his Cannon roared,
And let fly blood and death in storms amongst em.
Then might I hear their sleepy Prophet howled too,
And all their silver Crescents then I saw
Like falling Meteors spent, and set for ever
Under the Cross of Malta; death so wanton
I never looked upon, so full of revel. 
I will not be dressed yet: Me thought that fellow
Was fit for no conversation, nor no Christian
That had not half his brains knocked out, no Soldier.
Oh valiant young man, how I love thy virtue.
Pray ye sir be dressed, alas ye bleed apace yet.
Tic but the sweat of honour (alas) thou milksop,
Thou man of March-paine, can thou fear to see
A few light hurts, that blush they are no bigger,
A few small scratches? get ye a Caudle sirha,
Your finger aches: and let the old wives watch thee:
Bring in the booty, and the prisoners;
By Heaven Isle see 'em, and dispose 'em first,
Before I have a drop of blood wiped from me; go. 
You'll faint sir.
No, ye lie sir, like an Ass, sir;
I have no such pigs hurt in my belly.
By my life Captain
These hurts are not to be jested with.
If thou had 'em:
They are my companions fool, my family;
I cannot eat nor sleep without their company.
Dost take me for St Davy, that fell dead
With seeing of his nose bleed? 
Here they come sir:
But would you would be dressed.
Pox: dress thy self first,
Thou faintst a great deal faster whats all this?
The money and the merchandise ye took sir.
A goodly purchase: Is it for this we venture
Our liberties and lives? what can all this doe?
Get me some dozen surfeits, some seven fresh whores,
And twenty pot-alleys and to: and then I am virtuous.
Lay the Knights part by, and that to pay the Soldier:
This is mine own, I think I have deserved it:
Come, now look to me, and grope me like a chambermaid,
Isle neither start, nor speak; what's that in the truss there?
Tic cloth of Tissew sir, and this is Scarlet.
I shall look redder shortly then, I fear me,
And as a Captain ought, a great deal prouder.
Can ye cure me of that crack, Surgeon?
Yes, when your Suit's at pawn, sir.
There's for your plaster.
A very learned Surgeon: what's in that pack there?
Tic English Cloth.
That's a good wear indeed,
Both strong, and rich: but it has a virtue
A twang of the own Country, that spoils all:
A man shall ne'er be sober in it: Where are the Gentlemen
That ventured with me, both their lives and fortunes?
Come forward my fair spirits; Norandine
Forgets his worth, when he forgets your valours.
You have lost an eye, I saw ye face all hazards:
You have one left yet, to choose your Mistress.
You have your leg broke with a shot; yet sitting,
I saw you make the place good with your Pike still.
And your hand's gone; a good heart wants no instruments;
Share that amongst ye: there's an eye, an arm,
And that will bear you up, when your legs cannot.
Oh whore's the honest Sailor? that poor fellow,
Indeed that bold brave fellow, that with his Musket
Taught them new ways how to put their caps off;
That stood the fire of all the fight, twice blown,
And twice I gave him drowned: welcome ashore knave;
Give me thy hand, if they be not both lost: faith thou art welcome,
My tough knave welcome: thou wilt not shrink ith'washing.
Hold, there's a piece of Scarlet, get thee handsome.
And this to buy thee Buttons.
Thank ye Captain,
Command my life at all hours.
Thou durst give it.
You have deserved too.
We have seen the fight sir.
Yes: coyld up in a Cable, like salt Eels;
Or buried low ith'ballasse: do you call that fighting?
Where be your wounds? your knocks? your want of limbs rogues?
Art not thou he that asked the Master-gunner
Where thou might lie safest? and he strait answered,
Put thy head in that hole new bored with a Cannon,
For it was a hundred to one, another shot would not hit there:
Your wages you shall have, but for rewards
Take your own ways: and get ye to the Taverns;
There, when ye are hot with Wine amongst your admirers,
Take Ships, and Towns, and Castles at your pleasures,
And make the great Turk shake at your valours.
Bring in the prisoners now my brave Mussulmen,
You that are Lords of the Sea, and scorn us Christians,
Which of your mangy lives is worth this hurt here?
Away to prison with 'em, see 'em safe;
You shall find we have Galleys too, and slaves too.
What shall be done with this woman sir?
Pox take her,
It was she that set me on to fight with these rogues,
That Ring worm rot it: what can you doe now
With all your paintings, and your pouncings Lady,
To restore my blood again? you, and your Cupped
That have made a Carbonado of me; plague take ye,
Ye are too deep ye rogue, this is thy work woman,
Thou lousy woman; death, you go too deep still.
The seeing of your simpering sweetness: — ye Filly,
Ye Tit, ye-Tomboy, what can one nights jingling,
Or two, or ten, sweet heart, and oh▪ my dear chicken,
Scratching my head, or fumbling with my fore-mast,
Doe me good now? ye have powdered me for one year,
I am in sowce I thank ye; thank your beauty,
Your most sweet beauty: pox upon those goggles.
We cannot fight like honest men, for honour,
And quietly kill one another as we ought,
But in steps one of you; the devils holiness
And you must have a dance: away with her,
She stinks to me now.
Shall I have her Captain?
Or I?
Isle marry her.
Good Captain, I.
And make her a good Christian; lay hands on her;
I know she's mine.
Isle give my full share for her: have ye no manners
To thrust the woman so?
Share her among ye;
And may she give ye as many hurts as I have,
And twice as many aches.
Noble Captain,
Be pleased to free me from these Soldiers wildness,
Till I but speak two words.
Now for your maidenhead,
You have your book, proceed.
Victorious sir,
Tic seldom seen in men so valiant,
Minds so devoid of virtue: he that can conquer,
Should ever know how to preserve his conquest,
Tic but a base theft else. Valour's a virtue,
Crown of men's actions here; yours as you make it.
And can you put so rough a foil as violence,
As wronging of weak woman to your triumph?
Let her alone.
I have lost my husband, sir;
You feel not that: him that I love; you care not:
When fortune false on you thus, you may grieve too;
My liberty, I kneel not for; mine honour,
(if ever virtuous honour touched your heart yet)
Make dear, and precious, sir: you had a mother.
The rougy thing speaks finely, neat: who took ye?
For he must be your guard.
I wish no better,
A Noble Gentleman, and Nobly used me,
They called his name Miranda.
You are his then:
Ye have light upon a young man worth your service,
I free ye from all the rest: and from all violence;
He that doth offer't, by my head he hangs for it:
Go see her safe kept, till the Noble Gentleman
Be ready to dispose her: thank your tongue,
You have a good one, and preserve it good still:
Soldiers, come wait on me, Isle see ye paid all. 
I knew ye loved her, virtuously ye loved her,
Which made me make that hast: I knew ye prized her
As all fair minds do goodness.
Good Astorius,
I must confess I do much honour her,
And worthily I hope still.
Tic no doubt sir,
For on my life she is much wronged.
Very likely:
And I as much tormented I was abscent.
You need not fear, Peter Gomera's Noble,
Of a tried faith and valour.
This I know too:
But whilst was not there, and whilst she suffered;
Whilst virtue suffered, friend, oh how it loads me!
Whilst innocence and sweetness sunk together,
How cold it sits here? if my arm had fought her,
My truth, though naked, stood against all treasons,
My Sword here grasped, love on the edge, and honour,
And but a signal from her eye to seal it,
If then she had been lost; I brag too late,
And too much I decline the Noble Peter.
Yet some poor service I would do her sweetness,
Alas she needs it, my Astorius,
The gentle Lady needs it.
Noble spirit.
And what I can: prithee bear with this weakness.
Often I do not use these women's weapons
But where true pity is. I am much troubled,
And something have to do, I cannot form yet.
Isle take my leave, sir, I shall but disturb ye.
And please you for a while: and pray to fortune
To smile upon this Lady.
All my help sir. 
Gomera's old and stiff: and he may lose her,
The winter of his years and wounds upon him:
And yet he has done bravely hithero;
Mountferrats fury, in his heat of summer,
The whistling of his Sword like angry storms,
Renting up life by the roots, I have seen him scale
As if a Falcon had run up a train,
Clashing his warlike pinions, his steeled curasse,
And at his pitch inmew the Town below him.
I must do something. 
Noble sir, for Heaven sake
Take pity of a poor afflicted Christian
Redeemed from one affliction to another.
Boldly you ask that, we are bound to give it.
From what affliction sir?
From cold, and hunger:
From nakedness, and stripes.
A prisoner?
A slave, sir, in the Turkish prize, new taken;
That in the heat of fight, when your brave hand
Brought the Dane succour, got my irons off,
And put my self to mercy of the Ocean.
And swam to Land?
I did sir, Heaven was gracious;
But now a stranger, and my wants upon me,
Though willingly I would preserve this life sir,
With honesty and truth; I am not looked on;
The hand of pity, that should give for Heaven sake,
And charitable hearts are grown so cold, sir,
Never remembering what their fortunes may be.
Thou say too true: of what profession art thou?
I have been better trained; and can serve truly,
Where trust is laid upon me.
A handsome fellow;
Hast thou ere bore Arms?
I have trod full many a march, sir,
And some hurts have to show: before me too, sir.
Pity this thing should starve, or forced for want
Come to a worse end. I know not what thou may be.
But if thou think it fit to be a servant,
Isle be a Master, and a good one to thee,
If ye deserve, sir.
Else I ask no favour.
Then sir, to try your trust, because I like you,
Go to the Dane, of him receive a woman,
A Turkish prisoner; for me receive her,
I hear she is my prize: look fairly to her,
For I would have her know, though now my prisoner,
The Christians need no Schoolmasters for honour.
Take this to buy thee clothes: this Ring, to help thee
Into the fellowship of my house: ye are a stranger,
And my servants will not know ye else; there keep her,
And with all modesty preserve your service.
A foul example find me else: Heaven thank ye.
Of Captain Norandine?
The same.
Tic done sir:
And may Heavens goodness ever dwell about ye.
Wait there till I come home.
I shall not fail, sir. 
Tic strange it should be so, that your high mettle
should check thus poorly: dully; most un-manly.
Let me alone.
Thus leadenly?
— take ye.
At every childish fear? at every shadow?
Are you Mountferrat, that have done such deeds?
Wrought through such bloody fields, men shake to speak of?
Can ye go back? is there a safety left yet
But fore-right? is not ruin round about ye?
Have ye not still these arms, that Sword, that heart whole?
Is it not a man ye fight with, and an old man,
A man half killed already? Am not I here
As lovely in my black to entertain thee,
As high, and full of heat, to meet thy pleasures?
I will be alone.
Ye shall: farewell sir;
And doe it bravely, never think of conscience:
There is none to a man resolved be happy. 
No, most unhappy wretch, as thou hast made me
More devil then thy self, I am.
Alone,
And troubled too, I take it: how he starts?
All is not handsome in thy heart Mountferrat.
God speed ye sir, I have been seeking of ye:
They say you are to fight to day.
What then?
Nay nothing but good fortune to your Sword, sir.
Ye have a cause requires it, the Islands safety,
The orders, and your honours.
And do you make a question
I will not fight it Nobly?
Ye dare fight,
Ye have, and with as great a confidence as justice,
I have seen ye strike as home, and hit as deadly.
Why are these question then?
Isle tell ye quickly.
Ye have a Lady in your cause, a fair one,
A gentler never trod on ground, a Nobler.
Do ye come on so fast? I have it for ye.
The Sun ne'er saw a sweeter.
These I grant ye:
Nor dare I against beauty heave my hand up,
It were unmanly, sir; too much unmanly:
But when these excellencies turn to ruin,
To ruin of themselves, and those protect 'em;
When virtue's lost lust, and dishonour entered,
Loss of our selves, and souls basely projected—
Do you think tic so?
Too sure.
And can it be?
Can it be thought Mountferrat, so much sweetness,
So great a magazine of all things precious,
A mind so heavenly made, prithee observe me.
I thought so to: now by my holy Order,
He that had told me, (till experience found it
Too bold a proof) this Lady had been vicious—
I wear no dull Sword sir, nor hate I virtue,
Against her brother? to the man has bred her?
Her blood and honour?
Where ambitious lust
Desires to be above the rule prescribed her,
Takes hold, and wins, poor chastity, cold duty,
Like fashions old forgot, she flings behind her,
And puts on blood and mischief, death, and ruin,
To raise her new built hopes, new faith to fasten her:
Ma' foy, she is as foul, as heaven is beauteous.
Thou least; thou least Mountferrat: thou least basely.
Stare not, nor swell not with thy pride: thou least;
And this shall make it good.
Out with your heat first,
Ye shall be fought withal.
By — that Lady,
The virtue of that woman, were all the good deeds
Of all thy families bound in one faggot,
From Adam to this hour, but with one sparkle
Would fire that wisp, and turn it to light ashes.
Oh pitiful young man, stroke blind with beauty!
Shot with a women's smile: poor, poor Miranda;
Thou hopeful young man once; but now thou lost man:
Thou naked man of all that we call Noble,
How art thou consent? did thou know what I do,
And how far thy dear honour (mark me fool)
Which like a father I have kept from blasting,
Thy tender honour is abused▪ but fight first,
And then too late, thou shalt know all.
Thou least, still.
Stay, now Isle show thee all, and then Isle kill thee.
I love thee so dear, time shall not disgrace thee.
Read that.
It is her hand: it is most certain;
Good Angels keep me: that I should be her agent
To betray Malta, and bring her to the Bash,
That on my tender love lay all her project!
Eyes, never see again, melt out for sorrow,
Did the devil do this?
No, but his Dam did it,
The virtuous Lady that you love so dearly;
Come, will ye fight again?
No, prithee kill me:
For Heaven sake, and for goodness sake dispatch me,
For the disgrace sake that I gave thee, kill me.
Why, are ye guilty?
I have lived Mountferrat,
To see dishonour swallow up all virtue,
And now would dye: by heavens eternal brightness,
I am as clear as Innocence.
I knew it,
And therefore kept this Letter from all knowledge,
And this sword from anger, ye had died else.
And yet I lye, and basely lye.
O virtue!
Unspotted virtue, whether art thou vanished?
What hast thou left to abuse our fraileties
In shape of goodness?
Come, take courage, man,
I have forgiven and forgot your rashness,
And hold you fair as light in all your actions,
And by my troth I grieved your love; take comfort,
There be more women.
And more mischief in 'em.
The justice I shall doe, to right these villains
Shall make ye man again: i'll strike it sure Sir.
Come, look up bravely: put this puling passion
Out of your mind; one knock for thee Miranda,
And for the Boy, the grave Gomera gave thee,
When she accepted thee her Champion;
And in thy absence, like a valiant Gentleman,
I yet remember it: he is too young,
Too Boyish, and to tender, to adventure :
I'll give him one sound rap for that: I love thee,
Thou art a brave young spark.
Boy did he call me?
Gomera call me Boy?
It pleased his gravity,
To think so of ye then: they that doe service,
And honest service, such as thou, and I doe,
Are either knaves, or Boys.
Boy, by Gomera?
How looked he when he said it? for Gomera
Was ever wont to be a virtuous Gentleman,
Humane, and sweet.
Yes, when he will, he can be;
But let it go, I would not breed dissention;
It is an unfriendly office, and had it been
To any of a higher strain then you Sir,
The well known, well approved, and loved Miranda,
I had not thought on it: it was happily, his haste too,
And zeal to her.
A Traitor and a Boy too?
Shame take me if I suffer't: puff: farewell love.
Ye know my business, I must leave ye Sir,
My hour grows on a pace.
I must not leave you
I dare not, nor I will not, till your goodness
Have granted me one courtesy: ye say ye love me?
I doe, and dearly: ask, and let that courtesy
Nothing concern mine honour,
You must doe it.
Or you will never see me more:
What is it?
It shall be great that puts ye of; pray speak it.
Pray let me fight to day: good, dear Mountferrat,
Let me, and bold Gomera—
Fie Miranda,
Doe ye weigh my worth so little?
On my knees,
As ever thou had true touch of a sorrow
Thy friend conceived, as ever honour loved thee.
Shall I turn recreant now?
It is not thy cause,
Thou hast no reputation wounded in it,
Thines but a general zeal: 'death: I am tainted,
The dearest twyn to life, my credit's murdered,
Baffell'd, and boyed,
I am glad ye have swallowed it,
I must confess I pity ye; and it is a justice,
A great one too, you should revenge these injuries:
I know it, and I know ye fit and bold to doe it,
And man, as much as man may: but Miranda,
Why doe ye kneel?
By — I'll grow to the ground here,
And with my sword dig up my grave, and fall in it
Unless thou grant me: dear Mountferrat, friend,
Is any thing in my power, to my life, Sir?
The honour shall be yours.
I love ye dearly,
Yet so much I should tender.
I'll preserve all:
By — I will: or all the sin fall with me,
Pray let me.
Ye have won: i'll once be coward
To pleasure you.
I kiss your hands, and thank ye.
Be tender of my credit, and fight bravely.
Blow not the fire that flames.
I'll send mine Armour,
My man shall presently attend ye with it,
For you must arm immediately, the hour calls,
I know twill fit ye right; be sure, and secret,
And last be fortunate; farewell; ye are fitted:
I am glad the load's off me.
My best Mountferrat. 
Doctor, I will see the Combat, that's the truth on it
If I had never a Leg, I would crawl to see it.
You are most unfit, if I might council ye,
Your wounds so many, and the ayre —
The Halter;
The airs as good an ayre, as fine an ayre;
Would thou have me live in an oven?
Beside the noise, Sir:
Which to a tender body.
That's it, Doctor,
My body must be cured with all: if you'll heal me quickly,
Boyle a Drum-head in my broth: I never prosper,
With knuckles o'veale, and birds in sorrel sops,
Cawdles, and Cullysses; they wash me away
Like a horse had eaten grains: if thou wilt cure me
A pickled herring, and a pottle of Sack, Doctor,
And half a dozen trumpets.
Ye are a strange Gentleman,
As ere thou knew: wilt thou give mean other glister
That I may sit cleanly there, like a french Lady,
When she goes to a Mask at Court? whore's thy hoboy?
I am glad ye are grown so merry. 
Welcome Gentlemen.
We come to see you sir; and glad we are
To see you thus, thus forward to your health, sir.
I thank my Doctor here.
Nay, thank your self sir,
For by my troth, I know not how he's cured,
He nev'r observes any of our prescriptions.
Give me my money again then, good sweet Doctor,
Wilt thou have twenty shillings a day for vexing me.
That shall not serve ye sir; 
Then forty shall sir,
And that will make ye speak well: hark the Drums
They begin to beat to the field: O noble Dane,
Never was such a stake, I hope of innocence
Plaid for in Malta and in blood before.
It makes us hang our heads all.
A bold villain:
If there be treason in it: accuse poor Ladies?
And yet they may do mischief to: i'll be with ye:
If she be innocent, I shall find it quickly,
And something then i'll say.
Come, lean on us, sir,
I thank ye Gentlemen: and domino Doctor,
Pray bring a little sneezing powder in your Pocket,
For fear I sound when I see blood.
You are pleasant. 
Are the Combatants come in? 
Yes.
Make the field clear there.
That's done too.
Then to the prisoner: the grand Master's coming,
Let's see that all be ready there.
Too ready.
How ceremonious our very ends are?
Alas, sweet Lady,
If she be innocent, 
No dodbt but justice will direct her Champion 
Away: I hear 'em come:
Pray heavwn she prosper.
Give Captain Norandine a chair.
I thank your Lordship.
Sit sir, and take your ease: your hurts require it.
You come to see a women's cause descrided:
That's all the knowledge now, or name I have for her:
They say a false, a base, and treacherous woman,
And partly proved too.
Pity it should be so:
And if your Lordship durst ask my opinion,
Sure, I should answer no: so much I honour her:
And answer't with my life too: But Gomera
Is a brave Gentleman; the other valiant,
And if he be not good, dogs gnaw his flesh off,
And one above 'em both will find the truth out.
He never fails, sir,
That's the hope rests with me.
How nature, and his honour struggle in him!
A sweet, clear, noble Gentleman. 
Make room there.
Go up: and what you have to say, say there,
Thus I ascend: nearer I hope to heaven,
Nor do I fear to tread this dark black Mansion:
The I mage of my grave each foot we move,
Goes to it still: each hour we leave behind us,
Knols sadly toward it: My noble Brother,
For yet mine innocence dares calls ye so,
And you the friends to virtue, that come hither,
The Chorus to this Tragic Scene behold me,
Behold me with your justice, not with pity,
(My cause was ne'er so poor to ask compassion,)
Behold me in this spotless white I wear,
The Emblem of my life, of all my actions,
So ye shall find my story, though I perish:
Behold me in my Sex, I am no Soldier,
Tender, and full of fears our blushing Sex is,
Unhardned with relentless thoughts; unhitched
With blood, and bloody practise: alas we tremble;
But when an angry dream afflicts our fancies,
Dye with a tale well told: had I been practised,
And known the way of mischief, travelled in it,
And given my blood, and honour up to reach it,
Forgot religion, and the line I sprung on,
Oh heaven, I had been sit then for thy justice,
And then in black as dark as hell, I had howled here.
Last, in your own opinions weigh mine innocence;
Amongst ye I was planted from an Infant
(would then if heaven had so been pleased, I had perished)
Grew up, and goodly, ready to bear fruit,
The honourable fruit of marriage:
And am I blasted in my bud with treason?
Boldly, and basely of my fair name ravished,
And hither brought to find my rest in ruin?
But he that knows all he that rights all wrongs,
And in his time restores, knows me: I have spoken.
If ye be innocent, heaven will protect ye,
And so I leave ye to his Sword strikes for ye,
Farewell.
O that went deep: farewell dear brother,
And howsoe'r my cause goes, see my body
(upon my knees I ask it) buried chastely;
For yet, by holy truth, it never trespassed.
Justice sit on your cause; &amp; heaven fight for ye.
Two of ye Gentlemen, doe me but the honour
To lead me to her: good my Lord, your leave too:
You have it sir.
Give me your fair hands fearless,
As white as this I see your Innocence,
As spotless, and as pure: be not afraid Lady,
You are but here brought to your nobler fortune,
To add unto your life immortal story:
Virtue, through hardest things arrives at happiness,
Shame follow that blunt sword that looses you:
And he that strikes against you: I shall study
A curse or two for him: once more your fair hands,
I never brought ill luck yet; be fearless happy.
I thank ye, noble Captain.
So I leave ye.
Call in the Knights severally. 
But two words to my Champion,
And then to heaven and him, I give my cause up:
Speak quickly: and speak short.
I have not much sir.
Noble Gomera, from your own free virtue,
You have undertaken here a poor Maids honour,
And with the hazard of your life: and happily
You may suspect the cause, though in your true worth
You will not show it, therefore take this testimony
(And as I hope for happiness, a true one)
And may it steel your heart, and edge your good sword,
Ye fight for her as spotless of these mischiefs,
As heaven is of our sins, or truth of errors,
And so defy that treacherous man, and prosper.
Blessing o'thy heart Lady.
Give the signal to 'em. 
It is bravely fought Gomera; follow that blows,
Well struck again boy: look upon the Lady,
And gather spirit: brave again: lye close.
Lye close I say: he fights aloft, and strongly:
Close for thy life: a — of that fell buffet:
Retire, and gather breath: ye have day enough knights;
Look lovely on him Lady: to it again now,
Stand, stand Gomera, stand: one blow for all now.
Gather thy strength together; God bless the woman:
Why, wher's thy noble heart? heaven bless the Lady.
Oh, Oh!
She is gone, she is gone:
Now strike it.
Hold, hold: he yields: hold thy brave sword, he's con∣quer'd:
He's thine Gomera, now be joyful Lady:
What could this thief have done, had his cause been equal?
He made mv heart strings tremble.
Off with his Cask there;
And Executioner, take you his head next.
Oh cursed fortune!
Stay, I beseech ye sir, and this one honour
Grant me, I have deserved it, that this villain
May live one day, to envy at my justice,
That he may pine, and dye before the sword fall.
Viewing the glory, I have won her goodness.
He shall, and you the harvest of your valour
Shall reap brave sir, abundantly.
I have saved her.
Preserved her spotless worth from black destruction,
Her white name to eternity delivered,
Her youth, and sweetness, from a timeless rain.
Now Lord Valet, if this bloody labour
May but deserve her favour.
Stay and hear me first.
Of with his Cask, this is Miranda's voice.
It is he indeed, or else mine eyes abuse me,
What makes he here thus?
The young Miranda?
Is he mine enemy too?
None has deserved her
If worth must carry it, and service seek her,
But he that saved her honour.
That's I Miranda.
No, no, that's I Gomera, be not so forward,
In bargain for my love, ye cannot cozen me.
I fought it.
And I gave it: which is nobler?
Why every Gentleman would have done as much
As you did: fought it: that's a poor desert, sir,
They are bound to that; but then to make that fight sure,
To doe as I did, take all danger from it
Suffer that coldness, that must call me now
Into disgrace for ever, into pity.
I undertook first, to preserve from hazard.
And I made sure no hazard should come near his.
It was T defied Mountferrat.
It was I wrought him,
You had had a dark day else; it was I defied
His conscience first, it was I that shook him there,
Which is the brave defiance.
My life and honour
At stake I laid,
My care; and truth layby it
Least that stake might be lost: I have deserved her,
And none but I; the Lady might have perished,
Had Fell Mountferrat struck it, from whose malice
With cunning, and bold confidence I caught it,
And it was high time, and such a service Lady
For you, and for your innocence, for who knows not
The all devouring sword of fierce Mountferrat?
I showed ye what I could doe, had I been spiteful
Or Master but of half the poison he bears,
(Hell take his heart for it) and beshrow these hands Mad∣dam,
With all my heart, I wish a mischief on 'em,
They made ye once look sad: such another fright
I would not put ye in, to own the Island,
Yet pardon me, it was but to show a Soldier,
Which, when I had done, I ended your poor coward.
Let some look out, for the base Knight 
I hope he's far enough if his man be trusty:
This was a strange misfortune; I must not know it.
That most debauched knight! come down sweet sister.
My spotless Sister; now, pray thank these Gentlemen,
They have deserved both truly, nobly of ye.
Both excellently dearly, both all the honour
All the respect and favour.
Both shall have it;
And as my life, their memories i'll nourish.
Ye are both true Knights, and both most worthy Lovers,
Here stands a Lady ripened with your fervice,
Young, fair, and (now I dare say) truly honourable:
It is my will she shall marry: marry now,
And one of you (she cannot take more nobly) your deerts
Begot this will, and bred it; both her beauty
Cannot enjoy: dare ye mark me your umpler?
Mir. With all our Souls.
He must not then be angry
That looses her.
O, that were Sir, unworthy,
A little sorrow he may find.
It is manly.
Gomera, you are a brave accomplished Gentleman
A braver no where lives then is Miranda,
In the white way of virtue, and true valour.
Ye have been a pilgrim long: yet no man farther
Has trod those thorny steps then young Miranda,
You are gentle: he is gentleness self: Experience
Calls you her brother; it is his hopeful heir.
The young man now, and 't be thy will.
Your hand eire;
You uhdertooke first: nobly undertook,
This Ladies cause: you made it good, and fought it
You must be ferv'd first: take her, and enjoy her,
I give her to you: kiss her; are you pleased now?
My joy's so much I cannot speak.
Nay, fairest sir;
You must not be displeased: you break your promise.
I never grieved at good, nor dare I now sir,
Though something seem strange to me.
I have provided
A better match for you: more full of beauty,
I'll wed ye to our Order: there's a Mistress,
Whose beauty ne'er decays: time stands below her:
Whose honour Ermin-like, can never suffer,
Spot, or black soil; whose eternal issue
Fame brings up at her breasts, and leaves 'em saintied.
Her you shall marry.
I must humbly thank ye.
Saint Thomas Fort, a charge of no small value
I give ye too, in present, to keep waking
Your noble spirits; and to breed ye pious,
Isle send ye a probation Robe; wear that
Till ye shall please to be our brother: how now?
Mountferrat's fled sir. 
Let him go a while
Till we have done these rites, and seen these coupled:
His mischief now lies open: come all friends now.
And so let's march to the Temple, sound those Instru∣mints,
That were the signal to a day of blood;
Evil beginning hours may end in good. 
Come, we'll have wenches man, and all brave things.
—Let her go: we'll want no Mistresses,
Good swords, and good strong Armours.
Those are best Captain.
And fight 'till Queens be in love with us, and run
Isle see ye at the Fort within these two days,
And let's be merry prithee.
By that time I shall.
Why that's well said: I like a good heart truly.
The daye's not yet broke Sir.
It is the cooler riding,
I must go see Miranda: bring my horse
Round to the South Port: i'll out here at the beach
And meet ye at the end of the Sycamores,
It is a sweet walk, and if the wind be stirring
Serves like a fan to cool. 
Which walk?
Why that sir,
Where the fine City dames meet to make matches.
I know it.
Speed ye then: what mirth is this?
The watches are not yet discharged, I take it:
These are brave careless Rogues; i'll hear the Song out
And then i'll fit ye for it, merry Companions:
Here's notable order, now for a trick to tame ye—
Owgh, owgh.
Hark, hark, what's that below us? who goes there?
Owgh, owgh, owgh.
It is a Bear broke loose: pray call the Corporal.
The Dutchmans huge fat sow.
I see her now, and five fine pigs.
Owgh, owgh.
Now, what's the matter?
Here's the great fat Sow, Corporal.
The Dutch-mans Sow, and all the Pigs, brave fat pigs,
You have been wishing long she would break loose.
Owgh, owgh.
It is she indeed, there's a white pig now sucking,
Look, look, doe you see it firs.
Yes, very well sir.
A notable fat whoreson; come two of ye.
Go down with me, we'll have a tickling breakfast.
Let's eat 'em at the Cross.
There's the best liquor.
I'll liquor some of ye, ye lazy rogues,
Your minds are of nothing but eating and swilling:
What a sweet beast they have made of me? a Sow?
Hog upon hog? I hear 'em come. 
Go softly, and fall upon 'em finely, nimbly.
Bless me.
Why, what's the matter?
Oh the devil!
The devil, as high as a Steeple.
There he goes Corporal,
His feet are cloven too.
Stand, stand I say: death' how I shake?
Where be your Muskets?
There's no good of them:
Where be our Prayers, man?
Lord, how he stalks: speak to him Corporal.
Why, what a devil art thou.
Owgh owgh.
A dumb devil.
The worst devil that could come, a dumb devil,
Give me a Musket; he gathers in to me,
In the name of—speak what art thou?—speak devil,
Or Isle put a plumb in your belly.
Owgh, owgh, owgh.
Fie, fie, in what a sweat I am! Lord bless me,
My Muskets gone too, I am notable to stir it.
Who goes there? stand speak.
Sure I am enchanted.
Yet here's my harbert still: nay, who goes there sir,
What have I lost my self? what are ye?
The Guard.
Why what are we then: he's not half so long now.
Nor he has no tail at all, I shake still damnably.
The word.
'Have mercy on me, what word do's he mean,
Prithee devil if thou be the devil,
Doe not make an Ass of me; for I remember yet
As well as I am here, I am the Corporal,
Isle lay my life on it devil.
Thou art damned:
That's all one: but am not I the Corpo all?
I would give a thousand pound to be resolved now,
Had not I Soldiers here?
No, not a man,
Thou art debauched, and cozened.
That may be,
It may be I am drunk; Lord, where have I been?
Is not this my Halberd in my hand?
No, it is a May-pole.
Why then I know not who I am, nor what,
Nor whence I come.
Ye are an arrand rascal;
You Corporal of a watch.
It is the Dane's voice: you are no devil then.
No, nor no Sow, sir.
Of that I am right glad sir,
I was ne'er so frighted in my life, as I am a Soldier.
Tall watchmen,
A guard for a Goose, you sing away your Centuries.
A careful company: let me out of the port here,
I was a little merry with your worships:
And keep your guards strong, though the devil walk.
Hold, there's to bring ye into your wits again.
Go off no more to hunt Pigs: such another trick
And you will hunt the gallows.
Pray Sir pardon us:
And let the devil come next, i'll make him stand
Or make him stink.
Doe doe your duty truly.
Come let me cut, and come away: no more rage. 
Write thus to me? he hath fearfully, and basely
Betrayed his own cause; yet to free himself
He now ascribes the fault to me.
I know not.
What he hath done: but what he now desires,
His Letters have imform'd you.
Yes, he is
Too well acquainted with the power he holds,
Over my mad affections: I want time
To write: but pray you tell him, if I were
No better steeld in my strong resolutions
Then he hath shown himself in his; or thought
There was a hell hereafter, or a Heaven,
But in enjoying him, I should stick here,
And move no further: bid him yet take comfort;
For something I will doe, the devil would quake at,
But Isle untie this nuptial knot of love,
And make way for nis wishes: in the mean time
Let him lie close, for he is strictly sought for,
And practise to love her, that for his ends
Scorns fear and danger. 
All this I will tell him. 
Do so: farewell. My Lady, with my fellow,
So earnest in discourse! what ere it be
Isle second it.
He is such a Noble husband,
In every circumstance, so truly loving,
That I might say, and without flattery, Madam
The Sun sees not a Lady but your self
That can deserve him.
Of all men I say
That dare (for tic a desperate adventure)
Wear on their free necks the sweet yoke of woman,
(For they that do rapine, are no true husbands)
Give me a Soldier.
Why, are they more loving
Then other men?
And love too with more judgement;
For, but observe, you Courtier is more curious
To set himself forth richly then his Lady;
His baths, perfumes, nay paintings too, more costly
Then his frugality will allow to her,
His clothes as chargeable; and grant him but
A thing without a beard, and he may pass
At all times for a woman, and with some
Have better welcome: Now, your man of Lands
For the most part is careful to manure them,
But leaves his Lady fallow; your great Merchant
Breaks oftner for the debt he owes his wife,
Then with his creditos; and that's the reason
She looks elsewhere for payment: Now your Soldier—
I mary, do him right.
First, who has one,
Has a perpetual guard upon her honour;
For while he wears a Sword, Isander her self
Dares not bark at it: next, she sits at home,
Like a great Queen, and tends him forth to fetch in
Her Tribute from all parts; which being brought home,
He lays it at her feet, and seeks no further
For his reward, thcn what she may give freely,
And with delight too, from her own Exchequer
Which he finds ever open.
Be more modest.
Why, we may speak of that we are glad to taste of,
Among our selves I mean.
Thou talk of nothing.
Of nothing Madam? You have found it some∣thing;
Or with the raising up this pretty mount here,
My Lord hath dealt with spirits. 
Two long hours absent?
Thy pardon, Sweet: I have been looking on
The prize that was brought in by the brave Dane,
The valiant Norandine, and have brought something,
That may be thou wilt like of; but one kiss,
And then possess my purchase: there's a piece
Of cloth of Tissew) this of purpler Velvet,
And as they swear of the right Tyrian dye,
Which others here but weawy counterfeit:
If they are worth thy use, wear them; if not,
Bestow them on thy women.
Here's the husband.
While there is any trading oh the Sea
Thou shalt want nothing; tic a Soldiers glory,
How ever he neglect himself, to keep
His Mistress in full lustre.
You exceed sir.
Yet there was one part of the prize di spos'd of.
Before I came, which I grieve that I missed of,
Being almost assured, it would have been
A welcome present.
Pray you say, what was it?
A Turkish Captive of incomparable beauty,
And without question, in her Country Noble;
Which as companion to thy faithful Noble;
I would have given thee for thy slave.
But was she
Of such an exquisite form?
Most equisite.
And well descended?
So the habit promised,
In which she was taken.
Of what years?
Tic said
A Virgin of fourteen.
I pity her,
And wish she were mine, that I might have the means
To entertain her gently.
She's now Miranda's,
And as I have heard, made it her suit to be so.
Miranda;s? then her fate deserves not pity,
But envy rather.
Envy Oriana?
Yes, and their envy that live free.
How's this?
Why, she is fallen into the hands of one,
So full of that, which in men we stile goodness,
That in her being his slave, she is happier far
Then if she were confirmed the Sultans Mistress.
Miranda is indeed a Gentleman
Of fair desert, and better hopes, but yet
He hath his equals.
Where? I would go far,
As I am now, though much unfit for travails,
But to see one that without injury
Might be put in the scale, or paralleled,
In any thing that's Noble, with Mirands;
His knowledge in all services of war,
And ready courage, to put into act
That knowing judgement, as you, are a Soldier
You best may speak of. Nor can you deliver,
Nor I hear with delight, a better subject.
And heaven did well, in such a lovely feature
To place so chaste a mind; for he is of
So sweet a carriage, such a winning nature,
And such a bold, yet well disposed behaviour;
And to all these, he has such a charming tongue,
That if he would serve under Loves fresh colours,
What monumental Trophies might he raise,
Of his free conquests, made in Ladies favours?
Yet you did'sts, resis him, when he was
An earnest suitor to you.
Yes I did;
And if I were again sought to, I should;
But must ascribe it rather to the fate
That did appoint me yours, then any power
Which I can call mine own.
Even so?
Thanks fortune,
The plot I had to raise in him, doubts of her,
Thou hast effected.
I could tell you too,
What cause I have to love him, with what reason.
In thankfulness, he may expect from me,
All due observance; but I pass that, as
A benefit, for which in my behalf
You are his debtor.
I perceive it takes,
By his changed looks.
He is not in the City?
Is he my Lord?
Who Lady?
Why Miranda,
Having you here, can there be any else
Worth my enquiry?
This is somewhat more.
Then love to virtue,
Faith when he comes hither
(as sometimes, without question you shall meet him)
Invite him home.
To what end?
To dine with us,
Or sup.
And then to take a hard bed with you:
Mean you not so?
If you could win him to it,
▪Twould be the better; for his entertainment,
Leave that to me, he shall find Noble usage,
And from me a free welcome.
Have you never
Heard of a Roman Lady (Oriana)
Remembered as a president for Matrons,
(Chaste ones, I pray you understand) whose husband
Taxed for his sour breath by his Enemy,
Condemned his wife, for not acquainting him
With his infirmity?
Tic a common one;
Her answer was, having kissed none but him,
She thought it was a general disease
All men were subject to; but what infer you
From that my Lord?
Why, that this virtuous Lady
Had all her thoughts so fixed upon her Lord,
That she could find no spare time to sing praises
Of any other; nor would she employ
Her husband (though perhaps in debt to years
As far as I am) for an instrument
To bring home younger men that might delight her
With their discourse, or —
What my Lord?
Their persons,
Or if I shot speak plainer—
No it needs not,
You have said enough to make my innocence know
It is suspected.
You betray your self
To more then a suspicion; could you else
To me that live in nothing but love to you
Make such a gross discovery, that your lust
Had sold that heart I thought mine, to Miranda?
Or rise to such a height in impudence,
As to presume to work my yielding weakness
To play for your bad ends, to my disgrace
The Withal, or the Pander?
Doe not study
To print more wounds, (for that were tyranny)
Upon a heart that is pierced through already.
Thy heart? thou hast pierced through mine honour false one,
The honour of my house, fool that I was,
To give it up to the deceiving trust
Of wicked woman: for thy sake, wild creature,
For all I have done well in, in my life,
I have dug a grave, all buried in a wife;
For thee I have defied my constant Mistress,
That never failed her servant, glorious war;
For thee, refused the fellowship of an Order
Which Princes through all dangers have been proud
To fetch as far as from Jerusalem:
And am I thus rewarded?
By all goodness,
You wrong my Lady, and deserve her not,
When you are at your best: repent your rashness,
Twil show well in you.
Do, and ask her pardon.
No, I have lived too long, to have my faith
(My tried faith) called in question, and by him
That should know true affection is too tender
To suffer an unkind touch, without ruin;
Study ingratitude, all, from my example;
For to be thankful now, is to be false.
But be it so, let me die, I see you wish it;
Yet dead for truth, and pities sake, report
What weapon you made choice of, when you kilt me.
She faints,
What have ye done?
My last breath cannot
Be better spent, then to say I forgive you;
Nor is my death untimely, since with me
I take along, what might have been hereafter
In scorn delivered for the doubtful issue
Of a suspected mother.
Oh, she's gone.
For ever gone. Are you a man?
I grow here.
Open her mouth, and power tills Cordial in it;
If any spark of life be unquenched in her,
This will recover her.
Tic all in vain,
She's stiff already: live I, and she dead?
How like a murderer I stand? look up,
And hear me curse my self, or but behold
The vengeance I wilt take for it Oriana,
And then in peace forsake me: Jealousy,
Thou loathsome vomit of the fiends below,
What desperate hunger made me to receive thee
Into my heart, and soul? I let thee forth,
And so in death find ease; and do's ray fault then
Deserve no greater punishment? no, Isle live
To keep thee for a fury▪ to torment me,
And make me know what hell is on the earth:
All joys and hopes forsake me; all men's malice,
And all the plagues they can inflict, I wish it
Fall thick upon me: Let my tears be laughed at,
And may my enemies smile to hear me groan,
And dead, may I be pitied of none. 
Pray you sir why was the Ordnance of the Fort Discharged so suddenly?
It was the Governors pleasure,
In honour of the Dane, a custom used,
To speak a Soldiers welcome.
Tic a fit one:
But is my Master here too?
Three days since.
Might I demand without offence, so much,
Is it pride in him (however now a slave)
That I am not admitted to his presence?
His courtesy to you, and to mankind
May easily resolve you, he is free
From that poor vice which only empty men
Esteem a virtue.
What's the reason then,
As you imagine, sir?
Why I will tell you;
You are a woman of a tempting beauty,
And he, however virtuous, as a man
Subject to humane frailties; and how far
They may prevail upon him, should he see you,
He is not ignorant: and therefore chooses,
With care t'avoyd the cause that may produce
Some strange effect, which will not well keep rank
With the rare temperance, which is admired
In his life hitherto.
This much increases
My strong desire to see him.
It should rather
Teach you to thank the Prophet that you worship,
That you are such a mans, who though he may
Do any thing which youth and heat of blood
Invites him to, yet dares not give way to them:
Your entertainment's Noble, and not like
Your present fortune; and it all those tears
Which made grief lovely in you, in the relation
Of the sad story, that forced me to weep too,
Your husbands hard fate were not counterfeit;
You should rejoice that you have means to pay
A chaste life to his memory, and bring to him
Those sweets, which while he lived he could not taste of:
But if you wantonly bestow them on
Another man, you offer violence
To him, though dead; and his grieved spirit will suffer
For your immodest looseness.
Why, I hope sir,
My willingness to look on him, to whom
I owe my life and service, is no proof
Of any unchaste purpose.
So I wish too,
And in the confidence it is not, Lady,
I dare the better tell you he will see you
This night, in which by him I am commanded,
To bring you to his chamber; to what end
I easily should guess, were I Miranda;
And therefore, though I can yield little reason,
(But in a general love to women's goodness)
Why I should be so tender of your honour,
I willingly would bestow some counsel of you,
And would you follow it?
Let me first hear it,
And then I can resolve you.
My advice then
Is, that you would not, (as most Ladies use
When they prepare themselves for suc encounters)
Study to add, by artificial dressings
To native excellence; yours (without help)
But seen as it is now, would make a Hermit
Leave his deaths head, &amp; change his after hopes
Of endless comforts for a few short minutes
Of present pleasures; to prevent which, Lady,
Practice to take away from your perfections,
And to preserve your chastity unstained,
The most deformed shape that you can put on
To cloud your bodies fair gifts, or your minds,
(It being laboured to so chaste an end)
Will prove the fairest ornament.
To take from
The workmanship of Heaven, is an offence
As great, as to endeavour to add to it;
Of which Isle not be guilty: Chastity
That lodges in deformity, appears rather
A mulct imposed by nature, then a blessing;
And tic commendable only when it conquers,
Though ne'er so oft assaulted, in resistance:
For me, Isle therefore so dispose my self,
That if I hold out, it shall be with honour;
Or if I yield, Miranda shall find something
To make him love his victory. 
With what cunning
This woman argues for her own damnation?
Nor should I hold it for a miracle,
Since they are all born Sophisters, to maintain
That lust is lawful, and the end and use
Of their creation: would I never had
Hoped better of her; or could not believe,
Though seen the mine, I must ever grieve. 
Isle see you in your chamber. 
Pray ye no farther:
It is a ceremony I expect not,
I am no stranger here, I know my lodging,
And have slept soundly there, when the Turks Cannon
Played thick upon it: O it was Royal Music,
And to procure a sound sleep for a Soldier,
Worth forty of your Fiddles. As you love me
Press it no further.
You will overcome.
Waite on him carefully.
I have took since supper
A rouse or two too much, and by—
It warms my blood.
You'll sleep the better for it.
— on it, I should, had but I a kind wench
To pull my Boot-hose off, and warm my night-cap,
There's no charm like it: I love old Adams way;
Give me a diligent Eve, to wait towards bed-time,
Hang up your smooth chin page: and now I think on it,
Where is your Turkish prisoner?
In the Castle,
But yet I never saw her.
Fie upon you:
See her for shame? or, hark ye, if you would
Perform the friends part to me, the friends part,
It being a fashion of the last edition,
Far from panderism, now send her to me;
You look strange on it, no entertainments perfect
Without it on my word; no livery like it;
Isle tell her, he looks for it as duly
As for his see; there's no suit got without it,
Gold is an ass to it.
Go to bed, to bed.
Well, if she come, I doubt not to convert her,
If not, the sin lie on your head.
Good night 
There you shall findc hint Lady: you know what I have said,
And if you please you may make use.
No doubt sir.
From hence I shall hear all.
Come hither young one.
Beshrew my heart, a handsome wench: come nearer,
A very handsome one: doo not you grieve, Sweet,
You are a prisoner?
The loss of liberty
No doubt sir, is a heavy and sharpe burden
To them that feel it truly: But your servant,
Your humble handmaid, never felt that rigour,
Thanks to that Noble will: no want, no hunger,
(Companions still to slaves) no violence,
Nor any unbeseeming act, we start at,
Have I yet met with; all content and goodness,
Civility, and sweetness of behaviour
Dwell round about me; therefore, worthy Master,
I cannot say I grieve my liberty.
Do not you fancieme too cold a Soldier,
Too obstinate an enemy to youth,
That had so fair a Jewel in my Cabinet,
And in so long a time, would ne'er look on it?
What can she say now?
Sure I desired to see ye,
And with a longing wish.
There's all her virtue.
Pursued that full desire to give ye thanks sir,
The only Sacrifice I have left, and service
For all the virtuous care you have kept me safe with.
She holds well yet.
The pretty fool, speaks finely:
Come sit down here.
O sir, tic most unseemly.
Isle have it so: fit close; now tell me truly,
Did you ere love yet?
My years will answer that sir.
And did you then love truly?
So I thought sir.
Can ye love me so?
Now!
With all my duty;
I were unworthy of those favours else,
You daily shower upon me.
What think thou of me?
I think ye are a truly worthy Gentleman,
A pattern, and a pride to the age ye live in,
Sweet as the commendations all men give ye.
A pretty flattering rogue; dare ye kiss that sweet man
Ye speak to sweetly of? Come,
Farewell virtue.
What hast thou go between thy lips? kiss once more.
Sure thou hast a spell there.
More then ere I knew sir.
All hopes go now.
I must tell you a thing in your ear, and you must hear me,
And hear me willingly, and grant me so too,
Twill not be worth my asking else.
It must be
A very hard thing fir, and from my power,
I shall deny your goodness.
Tic a good wench; I must lie with ye Lady.
Tic something strange:
For yet in all my life I knew no bedfellow.
You will quiekly find that knowledge.
To what end sir?
Art thou so innocent, thou can not guess at it?
Did thy dreams never direct thee?
Faith none yet sir.
Isle tell thee then: I would meet thy youth and pleasure;
Give thee my youth for that, by Heaven she fires me,
And teach thy fair white arms, like wanton Eves,
A thousand new embraces,
Is that all sir?
And say I should try, may not we lie quietly?
Upon my conscience I could.
That's as we make it.
Grant that, that likes ye best, what would ye doe then?
What would I do? certainly, I am no baby,
Nor brought up for a Nun; hark in thine ear.
Fie, fie, sir.
I wold get a brave boy on thee,
A warlike boy.
Sure we shall get ill Christians.
We will mend 'em in the breeding then.
Sweet Master.
Never belief in woman come near me more.
My best and noblest sir, if a poor Virgin,
(For yet by —I am so) should change so far
(Seeing your excellence, and able sweetness)
To forget her self, and slip into your bosom,
Or to your bed, out of a doting on ye,
Take it the best way; have you that cruel heart,
That murdering mind too?
Yes by my troth (Sweet) have I,
To lie with her.
And do you think it well done?
That's as she'll think when tic done; come to bed wench,
For thou art so pretty, and so witty a companion,
We must not part to night.
Faith let me go sir,
And think better on it.
Y faith thou shalt not;
I warrant thee Isle think on it.
I have heard 'em say here,
You are a maid too.
I am sure I am, wench,
If that will please thee.
I have seen a wonder,
And would you lose that for a little wantonness,
(Consider my sweet Master, like a man, now,)
For a few honied kisses, slight embraces,
That glory of your youth, that crown of sweetness?
Can ye deliver that unvalued treasure?
Would ye forsake, to seek your own dishonour,
What gone, no age recovers, nor repentance?
To a poor stranger?
Hold there again, thou art perfect.
I know you do but try me.
And I know
Isle try you a great deal further: prithee to bed;
I love thee, and so well: come kiss me once more;
Is a maidenhead ill bestowed of me?
What's this sir?
Why, tic the badge (my Sweet) of that holy Order
I shortly must receive, the Cross of Malta.
What virtue has it?
All that we call virtuous.
Who gave it first?
He that gave all, to save us.
Why then tic holy too?
True sign of holiness,
The badge of all his Soldiers that profess him.
The badge of all his soldiers that profess him,
Can save in dangers?
Yes.
In troubles comfort?
You say true, sweet.
In sickness, restore health?
All this it can do.
Preserve from evils, that afflict our frailties.
I hope she will be Christian: all these truly.
Why are you sick then, sick to death with lust?
In danger to be lost? no holy thought,
ln all that heart, nothing but wandering frailties
Wild as the wind, and blind as death or ignorance,
Inhabit there.
Forgive me heaven, she says true.
Dare ye profess that badge, profane that goodness?
Thou hast redeemd thy self again, most rarely.
That holiness and truth ye make me wonder at?
Blast all the bounty heaven gives, that remembrance.
O excellent woman.
Fling it from ye quickly,
If ye be thus resolved; I see a virtue
Appear in it like a sword, both edges flaming
That will consume ye, and your thoughts, to ashes,
Let them profess it that are pure, and noble,
Gentle, and just of thought, that build the cross,
Not those that break it, by—if ye touch me,
Even in the act, isle make that cross, and curse ye.
You shall not (fair) I did dissemble with ye,
And but to try your faith, I fashioned all this:
Yet something you provoakt me: this fair cross,
By me (if he but please to help, first gave it)
Shall ne'er be worn upon a heart corrupted;
Go to your rest, my modest, honest servant,
My fair, and virtuous maid, and sleep secure there,
For when you suffer, I forget this sign here.
A man of men too: O most perfect Gentleman!
All sweet rest to your sir; I am half a Christian,
The other half, i'll pray for; then for you, sir;
This is the foulest play i'll show, good night, sweet.
The Sun's not set yet?
No Sir.
Would it were,
Never to rise again to light the world.
And yet, to what vain purpose do I wish it,
Since though I were environed with thick mists,
Black as Cymerian darkness, or my crimes,
There is that here, upon which, as an anvil
Ten thousand hammers strike, and every spark
They force from it, to me's an other Sun
To light me to my shame?
Take hope, and comfort.
They are aides indeed, but yet as far from me,
As I from being innocent: this cave fashioned
By provident nature, in this solid Rock
To be a den for beasts, alone, receives me,
And having proved an enemy to mankind,
All humane helps forsak me.
I'll ne'er leave you,
And wish you would call back that noble courage
That old invisible fortitude of yours
That used to shrink at nothing.
Then it did not.
But it was when I was honest; then in the height
Of all my happiness, of all my glories,
Of all delights, that made life precious to me,
I durst die Rocca; death it self then to me
Was nothing terrible, because I knew,
The fame of a good Knight would ever live
Fresh on my memory; but since I fell
From my integrity, and dismised those guards,
Those strong assurances of innocence,
That constancy fled fron me, and what's worse,
Now I am loathsome to my self; and life
A burden to me, rackd with sad remembrance
Of what I have done, and my present horrors
Unsufferable to me, tortured with despair
That I shall ne'er find mercy; hell about me,
Behind me, and before me, yet I dare not
Still fearing worse, put off my wretched being. 
To see this would deter a doubtful man
From mischievous intents, much more the practise
Of what is wicked: here's the Moore, look up sir,
Some ease may come from her.
New trouble rather,
And I expect it.
Who is this? Mountferrat?
Rise up for shame, and like a river dried up
With a long drought, from me, your bounteous Sea
Receive those tides of comfort, that flow to you;
If ever I looked lovely, if desert
Could ever challenge welcome; if revenge,
And unexpected wreak, were ever pleasing
Or could endear the giver of such blessings,
All these I come adorned with, and as due
Make challenge of those so long wished embraces
Which you (unkind) have hitherto denied me.
Why, what have you done for me?
Made Gomera
As truly miserable, as you thought him happy,
Could you wish more?
As if his sickness could
Recover me; the injuries I received
Were Orianas.
She has paid deer for them,
She's dead.
How?
Dead: my hate could reach no further:
Taking advantage of her in a swoon,
Under pretence to give a Cordial to her
I poisoned her: what stupid dullness is this?
What you should entertain with sacrifice,
Can you receive so coldly?
Bloody deeds
Are grateful offerings, pleasing to the devil,
And thou, in thy black shape, and blacker actions
Being hells perfect character, art delighted
To do what I though infinitely wicked,
Tremble to hear: thou hast in this tan from me
All means to make amends with penitence,
To her wronged virtues, and dispoild me of
The poor remainder of that hope was left me,
For all I have already, or must suffer.
I did it for the best.
For thy worst ends,
And be assured, but that, I think to kill thee
Would but prevent, what thy despair must force thee
To do unto thy self, and so to add to
Thy most assured damnation, thou went dead now,
But get thee from my sight: and if lust of me
Did ever fire thee (love, I cannot call it)
Leap down from those steep Rocks, or take advantage
Of the next Tree, to hang thy self, and then
I may laugh at it.
In the mean time
I must be bold, to do so much for you, ha, ha.
Why grinst thou, devil?
That it is in my power,
To punish thy ingratiude; I made trial
But how you stood affected, and since I know
I am used only for a property,
I can, and will revenge it to the full.
For, understand, in thy contempt of me
Those hopes of Oriana, which I could
Have changed to certainties, are lost for ever.
Why, lives she?
Yes, but never to Mountf•rrat,
Although it is in me, with as much ease
To give her freely up to thy possession,
As to remove this rush, which yet despair of,
For by my much wronged love, flattery, nor threats,
Tears, prayers, nor vows, shall ever win me to it:
So with my curse, I leave thee.
Prithee stay,
Thou knowst'I dote on thee, and yet thou art
So peevish, and perverse, so apt to take
Trifles unkindly from me.
To persuade me
To break my neck, to hang, then damn my self,
With you are trifles.
'T was my melancholy
That made me speak I know not what: forgive,
I will redeem my fault.
Believe him Lady.
A thousand times I will demand thy pardon,
And keep the reckoning on thy lips, with kisses.
Ther's something else, that would prevail more with me.
Thou shalt have all thy wishes do but bless me
With means to satisfy my mad desires
For once in Oriana, and for ever
I am thine, only thine my best Abdella.
Were I assured of this, and that you would
Having enjoyed her.
Any thing: make choice of
Thine own conditions.
Swear then, that performed.
(To free me from all doubts and fears hereafter)
To give me leave to kill her.
That our safety
Must of necessity urge us to.
Then know
It was not poison, but a sleeping potion
Which she received, yet of sufficient strength
So to bind up her senses, that no sign
Of life appeared in her, and thus thought dead
In her best habit, as the custom is
You know in Malta, with all ceremonies
She's buried in her families monument,
In the Temple of St. Iohn; i'll bring you thither,
Thus, as you are disguised; some six hours hence
The potion will leave working.
Let us haste then. 
Be my good angel, guide me.
But remember
You keep your Oath.
As I desire to prosper
In what I undertake.
I ask no more. 
Here sir, I have got the Key, I borrowd it
Of him that keeps the Church, the door is open.
Look to the horses then, and please the fellow.
After a few devotions, i'll retire.
Be not far off, there may be some use of ye,
Give me the light: come friend, a few good prayers
Were not bestowed in vain now, even from you sir.
Men that are bred in blood, have no way left 'em,
No bath, no purge, no time to wear it out
Or wash it off, but penitence, and prayer:
I am to take the order, and my youth
Laden I must confess with many follies,
Circled and bound about with sins as many
As in the house of memory live figures.
My heart i'll open now, my faults confess.
And rise a new man, heaven I hope, to a new life.
I have no great devotion, at this instant,
But for a prayer or two, I will not out sir,
Hold up your finger, when you have pried enough.
Go you to that end.
I shall ne'er pray alone sure,
I have bin so used to answer the Clerk: would I had a cushion, for I shall ne'er make a good Hermit, and knee till my knees are horn, these stones are plaguy hard where shall I begin now? for if I do not observe a method, I shall be out presently.
Oh, oh.
Whats that sir? did ye hear?
Ha; to your prayers.
It was here abouts, t'has put me clean awry now,
I shall ne'er get in again, ha, by Land,
And water, all children, and all women,
I there it was I left.
Oh, oh.
Never tell me sir,
Here's something got amongst us.
I heard a groan:
A dismal one,—Ore. Oh, Oh.
Here, tic here sir, it is here sir;
A devil in the wall.
Tic some illusion
To fright us from devotion—Ore. Oh, oh.
Why tic here,
The spirit of a huntsmen choked with butter,
Her's a new tomb, new trickments too.
For certain,
This has not bin three days here.
And a Tablet
With rimes upon it.
I prithee read 'em Norandine.
An Epi—and Epi—tiff. I think it is, I it is tiff, an Epitaff.
Upon the most excel, excel—lent—and.
Thou can not read.
I have spoiled imine eyes with gunpowder,
An Epitaph upon the most virtuous, and excellent Lady
The honour of Chastity, Oriana.
The grand masters sister: how a devil came she here?
When slipped she out oth'way, the stone's but half upon her.
Tic is a sudden change: certain the mischief
Mountferrat offered to her broke her heart-strings.
Would he were here, I would be the clerk my self,
And by this little light. I would bury him alive here,
Her's no lamenting now.
Oh, oh.
There tic.
Sure from the monument, the very stone groans for her.
Oh, deer Lady: blessing of women, virtue of thy sex;
How art thou set for ever, how stolen from us.
Babbling, and prating now converse with women.
Sir it rises, it looks up. 
Heaven bless us.
It is in women's clothes, it rises higher.
It looks about, and wonders, sure she lives sir.
Tic she, tic Oriana, tic that Lady.
Shall I go to her?
Where am I!
Stand still.
What place is this?
She is as live as I am.
What sinell of earth, and rotten bones, what dark place.
Lord, whether am I carried?
How she stares,
And sets her eyes upon him.
How is it deer Lady?
Do you know me, how she shakes?
You are a man.
A man that honours you.
A cruel man,
Ye are all cruel: are you in your grave too?
For ther's no trusting cruel man, above ground.
Byr' Lady, that goes hard.
To do your service
And to restore ye to the joys you were in.
I was in joys indeed, and hope—
She sincks again
Again she is gon; she is gon: gon as a shadow,
She sinks for ever, friend.
She is cold now,
She is certainly departed, I must cry too.
The blessed angels guide thee: put the stone too,
Beauty thou art gon to dust, goodness to ashes.
Pray take it well: we must all have our hours sir.
I, thus we are; and all our painted glory,
A bubble that a boy blows in to the ayre,
And there it breaks.
I am glad ye saved her honour yet.
Would I had saved her life now too: oh heaven
For such a blessing, such a timely blessing
O friend, what deer content 't would be, what story
To keep my name from worms?
Oh, oh.
She lives again,
It was but a trance.
Pray ye call my man in presently
Help with the stone first, oh she stirs again.
Oh call my man away.
I fly, I fly sir.
Upon my knees O heaven, O heaven I thank thee. The living heat steals into every member; En. Colon. &amp; Come help the Coffin out, softly, and suddenly Norand. Where is the Clerk?.
Drunk above, he is sure sir.
Sirah, you must be secret.
As your soul sir.
Softly good friend, take her into your arms.
Put in the crust again.
And bring her out there when I am a horseback
My man, and I will tenderly conduct her
Unto the Fort; slay you, and watch what issue,
And what inquirie's for the body.
Well sir.
And when ye have done, come back to me.
I will.
Softly, oh softly.
She grows warmer still sir.
What shall I do with' Key?
Thou can not stir now,
Leave it in the door: go get the horses ready. 
The door's already open, the Key in it. 
What were those past by?
Some scout of Soldiers, I think.
It may be well so, for I saw their horses,
They saw not us I hope.
No, no, we were close,
Beside they were far off.
What time of night is it?
Much about twelve I think.
Let me go in first
For by the leaving open of the door here
There may be some body in the Church: give me the Lantern.
You'll love me now I hope.
Make that good to me
Your promise is engaged for.
Why she is there
Ready prepared, and much about this time
Life will look up again.
Come in ell's sure,
Not a foot stirring, nor a tongue.
Heaven bless me,
I never entered with such unholy thoughts
This place before.
Ye are a fearful fool,
If men have appetites allowed 'em,
And warm desires, are there not ends too for 'em?
Whether shall we carry her?
Why, to the bark, sir,
I have provided one already waits us
The wind stands wondtrous fair too for our passge.
And there, when ye'have enjoyd her, for ye have that liberty
Let me alone to send her to feed fishes,
I'll no more sighs for her.
Where is the monument?
Thou art sure she will awake about this time?
Most sure, If she be not knocked oth'head: give me the Lantern,
Here it is, how is this, the stone off?
I, and nothing
Within the monument, that's worse, no body
I am sure of that, nor sign of any here,
But an empty Coffin.
No Lady.
No, nor Lord sir,
This Pie has bin cut up before.
Either the Devil
Must doe these tricks—
Or thou, damned one, worse;
Thou black swollen pitchy cloud, of all my afflictions:
Thou night hag, gotten when the bright Moon suffered
Thou hell it self confined in flesh: what trick now?
Tell me, and tell me quickly what thy mischief
Has done with her, and to what end, and whether
Thou hast removed her body, or by this holy place
This sword shall cut thee into thousand pieces.
A thousand thousand, strew thee ore the Temple
A sacrifice to thy black sire, the Devil.
Tell him, you see he's angry.
Let him burst,
Neither his sword, nor anger do I shake at,
Nor will yield to feed his poor suspicions,
His idle jealousies, and mad dogs hears
One thought against my self: ye have done a brave deed
A manly, and a valiant piece of Service
When ye have killed me; reckon't amongst your Battles:
I am sorry ye are so poor, so weak a gentleman
Able to stand no fortune: I dispose of her?
My mischief make her away? a likely project,
I must play booty against my self, if any thing cross ye
I am the devil, and the devils heir,
All plagues, all mischiefs.
Will I ye leave and doe yet?
I have done too much,
For, far too much for such a thankless fellow,
If I be devil, you created me,
I never knew those arts, nor bloody practises
(— of your cunning heart, that mine of mischief)
Before your flatteries won 'em into me,
Here did I leave her, leave her with that certainty
About this hour to wake again.
Where is she?
This is the last demand.
Did I now know it,
And were I sure, this were my latest minute
I would not tell thee: strike, and then i'll curse thee:
I see a light, stand close, and leave your angers.
We all miscarry else. 
I am now careless,
Peace, prithee peace, sweet, peace, all friends,
Stand close then.
Waite there Boy, with the light, till I call to thee,
In darkness was my soul and senses clouded
When my fair Jewel fell, the night of jealousy,
In all her blackness drawn about my judgement:
No light was let into me: to distinguish
Betwixt my sudden anger and her honour,
A blind sad Pilgrimage shall be my penance,
No comfort of the day will I look up at:
Far darker then my jealous Ignorance
Each place of my abode shall do my: prayers
No ceremonious lights shall set off more;
Bright Arms, and all that carry lustre, life,
Society, and solace, I forsake ye.
And were it not once more to see her beauties
(For in her bed of death, she must be sweet still,)
And on her cold sad lips seal my repentance;
Thou child of heaven, fair light I could not miss thee.
I know the tongue, would I were out again I have done him too much wrong to look upon him.
There is no shifting now, boldness, and confidence
Must carry it now away: he is but one neither,
Naked as you are, of a strength far under
But he has a cause above me,
That's as you handle it.
Peace: he may go again, and never see us.
I feel I weep apace, but whore's the flood,
The torrent of my tears, to drown my fault in,
I would I could now like a laden cloud
Begotten in the moist south, drop to nothing
Give me the Torch, Boy.
Now he must discover us.
He has already, never hide your head
Be bold, and brave, if we must dye together.
Who's there? what friend to sorrow? The Tomb wide open
The Stone off too? the body gone, by —
Look to the door Boy: keep it fast, who are ye?
What sacrilegious villains? false Mountferrat,
The wolf to honour, has thy hellish hunger,
Brought thee to tear the body out oth'tomb too?
Has thy foul mind so far wrought on thee? ha,
Are you there too? nay, then I spy a villainy
I never dream't of yet, thou sinful usher
Bred from that rottenness, thou bawd to mischief,
Doe you blush through all your blackness? will not that hide it?
I cannot speak.
You are well met, with your dam, sir,
Art thou a Knight? did ever on that sword,
The Christian cause sit nobly? could that hand fight,
Guided by fame, and fortune? that heart inflame thee,
With virtuous fires of valour, to fall off,
Fall off so suddenly, and with such foulness,
As the false Angels did, from all their glory?
Thou art no Knight, honour thou never heard of,
Nor brave desires could ever build in that breast,
Treason, and tainted thoughts, are all the Gods
Thou worship'st, all the strength thou had: and fortune;
Thou did things out of fear, and false heart, villain
Out of close traps and treacheries, they have raised thee.
Thou rav'st old man.
Before thou got off from me,
Had thou the glory of thy first fights on thee
Which thou hast basely lost, thy noblest fortunes,
And in their greatest lustres, I would make thee
Before we part, confess, nay, kneel, and doe it,
Nay, crying kneel, coldly for mercy, crying:
Thou art the recreant'st Rogue, time ever nourished,
Thou art a dog, I will make thee swear, a dog staved,
A mangy Cur-dogge; doe you creep behind the Altar?
Look how it sweats, to shelter such a rascal;
First, with thy venomous tooth infect her chaste life,
And then not dare to doe; next, rob her rest,
Steal her dead body out of the grave.
I have not.
Prithee come out, this is no place to quarrel in, Valiant Mountferrat come,
I will not stir.
Thou hast thy sword about thee,
That good sword, that never failed thee: prithee come,
We will have but five strokes for it, on, on Boy,
Here's one would fine be acquainted with thee,
Would wondrous fain cleave that Calves-head of yours sir,
Come, prithee let's dispatch, the Moon shines finely:
Prithee be killed by me, thou wilt be hanged else,
But it may be, thou long to be hanged.
Out with him, Sir,
You shall have my sword too: when he's dispatched once
We have the world before us.
Wilt thou walk fellow,
I never knew a Rogue, hang arse-ward so,
And such a desperate knave too.
Pray go with him,
Something I'll promise too,
You would be killed then?
No remedy; I see,
If thou dare doe it?
Yes, now I dare; lead out, i'll follow presently Under the Mount i'll meet ye.
Go before me,
He have ye in a string too.
As I am a Gentleman,
And by this holy place, I will not fail thee,
Fear not, thou shalt be killed, take my word for it
I will not fail.
If thou seap'st thou hast Cats luck,
The Mount?
The same: make haste, I am there before else.
Go get ye home; now if he scope I am Cowar'd.
Well, now I am resolved, and he shall find it.
How is it with the Lady?
Sir, as well
As it can be with one, who feeling knows now
What is the curse the divine justice laid
On the first sinful woman.
Is she in travel?
Yes sir; and yet the troubles of her mind
Afflict her more, then what her body suffers,
For in the extremity of her pain, she cries out,
Why am I here? Where is my Lord Gomera,
Then sometimes names Miranda, and then sighs,
As if to speak, what questionless she loves well,
If heard, might doe her injury.
Heavens sweet mercy
Look gently on her,
Prithee tell her, my Prayers
Are present with her, and good wench provide
That she want nothing: what's thy name?
Lucinda.
Lucinda? there's a prosperous omen in it,
Bea Lucina to her, and bring word
That she is safe delivered of her burden,
And thy rewards thy liberty: come Collonna,
We will go see how the Engineer has mounted
The Canon the great Master sent, be careful.
To view the works, and learn the discipline
That is used here: I am to leave the world
And for your service, which I have found faithful.
The charge that's mine, if I have any power
Hereafter may concern you.
I still find
A noble Master in you,
It is but justice,
Thou dost deserve it in thy care, and duty. 
Here's even ground, i'll stir no foot beyond it, Before I have thy head.
Draw Rocca.
Coward,
Hath inward guilt, robed thee as well of courage
As honesty? that without odds thou dare not
Answer a single Enemy?
All advantage
That I can take, expect.
We know you are valiant,
Nor doe we purpose to make further trial
Of what you can doe now: but to dispatch you.
And therefore fight, and pray together.
Villains,
Whose baseness, all disgraceful words made one,
Cannot express; so strong is the good cause
That seconds me, that you shall feel, with horror
To your proud hopes, what strength is in that arm,
Though old, that holds a swore made sharp by justice.
You come then here, to prate? 
Help Rocca, now,
Or I am lost forever; how comes this?
Are villainy, and weakness twynes?
I am gone too.
You shall not scope me, wretches,
I must doe it,
All will go wrong else. 
Treacherous bloody woman,
What hast thou done?
Done a poor women's part,
And in an instant, what these men so long
Stood fooling for.
This aide was unexpected,
I kiss thee for it,
His right arms only shot,
And that compelled him to forsake his sword,
He's else unwonted.
Cut his throat.
Forbear.
Yet doe not hope it is with intent to save thee.
But that thou moist live to thy farther torment
To see who triumphs over thee: come Mountferrat,
Here join thy foot to mine, and let our hearts
Meet with our hands, the contract that is made
And cemented with blood, as this of ours is,
Is a more holy sanction, and much surer,
Then all the superstitious ceremonies 
You Christians use.
Who's this?
Betrayed again?
By the report it made, and by the wind
The Pistol was discharged here.
Norandine,
As ever thou love valour, or wear Arms
To punish baseness, show it.
O the devil,
Gomera wounded, and my Brache black beauty
An actor in it?
If thou strik'st, i'll shoot thee.
How? fright me with your Pot-gun? what art thou?
Good heaven, the Rogue, the traitor rogue Mountferrat
To swinge the nest of you, is a sport unlooked for,
Hells— consume you.
As thou art a man;
I am wounded, give me time to answer thee.
Durst thou urge this? this hand can hold a sword yet.
Well done: to see this villain, makes my hurts
Bleed fresh again, but had I not a bone whole,
In such a cause I should doe thus, thus Rascals. 
Disarm them, and shoot any that resists.
Hold Corporal; I am Gomera,
Tic well yet, that once in an age you can
Remember what you watch for; I had thought
You had again been making out your parties
For sucking pigs.
It is well:
As you will answer
The contrary with your lives, see these forth coming.
That we shall doe.
You bleed a pace: good Soldiers
Go help him to a Surgeon,
Dare the worst,
And succour like your self.
From me learn courage.
Now for Miranda, this news will be to him
As welcome, as it is unexpected: Corporal,
There's something for thy care to night: my horse there.
How do's my Boy?
Oh, wondrous lusty, Madam,
A little Knight already: you shall live
To see him toss a Turk.
Gentle Lucinda,
Much must I thank thee for thy care, and service.
And may I grow but strong to see Ʋaletta, 
My husband, and my brother, thou shalt find
I will not barely thank thee.
Look Captain, we must ride away this morning
The Auberge sits to day, and the great Master
Writes plainly, I must or deliver in
(The year expired) my probation weed,
Or take the Cloak: you likewise Norandine
For your full service, and your last assistance
In false Mountferrats apprehension
Are here commanded to associate me; my twin in this high honour.
Isle none on it: doe they think to bind me to live chaste, sober, and temperately, all days of my life? they may as soon tie an Englishman to live so: I shall be a sweet Dane, a sweet Captain, go up and down drinking small beer, and swearing odds neagues; no Isle live a Squire at Arms still, and doe thou so too; and thou be wise: I have found the mystery now, why the Gentlemen wear but three bars of the cross, and the knights the whole one.
Why Captain?
Mary sir, to put us in remembrance, we are but three quarters crossed in our licence, and pleasures: but the poor Knights crossed altogther; the brothers at Arms, may yet meet with their Sisters at Arms, now and then, in brotherly love; but the poor Knights can∣not get a Lady for love, nor money: it is not so in other Countries I wis, pray haste you, for i'll along, and see what will come on it. 
Collonna, provide strait, all necessaries
For this remove, the Litter for the Lady,
And let Lucinda bear her company,
You shall attend on me.
With all my duties 
How fare you, gracious Mistress?
O Miranda.
You pleased to honour me with that fair title
When I was free, and could dispose my self;
But now, no smile, no word, no look, no touch
Can I impart to any, but as theft
From my Gomera; and who dares accept,
Is an unsurper.
Leave us; I have touched thee,
(Thou fairer virtue, then you're beautiful)
Hold but this test, so rich an one was never 
Tried by the hand of man, on the vast earth:
Sit brightest Oriana, is it sin
Still to profess I love you, still to vow
I shall doe ever? heaven my witness be,
It is not your eye, your cheek, your tongue, no part
That superficially doth snare young men,
Which has caught me; read over in your thoughts
The story that this man hath made of you,
And think upon his merit.
Only thought
Can comprehend it.
And can you be so
Cruel, thankless, to destroy his youth
That saved your honour, gave you double life?
Your own, and your fair Infants? that when fortune
(The blind foe to all beauty, that is good,)
Bandied you from one hazard to another,
Was even heavens Messenger, by providence
Called to the Temple, to receive you there,
Into these Arms, to give ease to your throws,
As if it had thundered; take thy due Miranda,
For she was thine; Gomera's jealousy
Struck death unto thy heart; to him be dead,
And live to me, that gave thee second life:
Let me but now enjoy thee: Oh regard
The torturing fires of my affections.
Oh master them, Miranda, as I mine;
Who follows his desires, such tyrants serves
As will oppress him, insupportably.
My flames, Miranda, rise as high as thine,
For I did love thee before my marriage,
Yet would I now consent, or could I think
Thou were in earnest, (which by all the souls
That have (for chastity) been sanctified
I cannot) in a moment I doe know
Thou'ldst call fair temperance up to rule thy blood,
Thy eye was ever chaste, thy countenance too honest,
And all thy woings was like maidens talk;
Who yields unto pleasures, and to lust
Is a poor captive, that in Golden Fetters
(And precious (as he thinks) but holding gives)
Frets out his life.
Find such another woman,
And take her for his labour, any man:
I was not worthy of thee, at my best,
Heaven knew I was not, I had had thee else;
Much less now gentle sir; Mirandas deeds
Have been as white, as Orianas fame,
From the beginning, to this point of time,
And shall we now begin to stain both thus?
Think on the legend which we two shall breed
Continuing as we are, for chastest dames
And boldest Soldiers to peruse and read,
I and read thorough, free from any act
To cause the modest cast the book away,
And the most honoured Captain fold it up.
Fairest; let go my hand: my pulse beats thick,
And my moved blood rides high in every vain,
Lord of thy self now, Soldier, and ever:
I would not for Aleppo, this frail Bark,
This bark of flesh, no better fleeres-man had
Then has Mountferrat's: may you kiss me, Lady?
No; though't be no essential injury,
It is a circumstance due to my Lord,
To none else: and my dearest friend, if hands
Playing together, kindle heate in you,
What may the game at lips provoke unto?
Oh what a tongue is here? whilst she doth teach
My heart to hate my fond unlawful love,
She talks me more in love, with love to her,
My fires she quenches with her arguments,
But as she breathes 'em, they blow fresher fires.
Sir further: now my flame cools; husband, wife,
There is some holy mystery in those names
That sure the unmarried cannot understand.
Now thou art strait, and dost enamour me,
So far beyhnd a carnal earthly love;
My very soul dotes on thee, and my spirits
Doe embrace thine, my mind doth thy mind kiss,
And in this pure conjunction we enjoy
A heavenlier pleasure then if bodies met:
This, this is perfect love, the other short,
Yet languishing fruition, every Swain
And sweating Groom may clasp, but or's refined
Two in ten ages cannot reach unto;
Nor is our spiritual love, a barren joy,
For mark what blessed issue we'll beget,
Dearer then children to posterity,
A great example to men's continence,
And women's chastity, that is a child
More fair, and comfortable, then any heir.
If all wives were but such, lust would not find
One corner to inhabit, sin would be
So strange, remission superfluous:
But one petition, I have done.
What (Sweet?).
To call me Lord, if the hard hand of death seize on Gomera first.
Oh, much too worthy;
How much you undervalue your own price,
To give your unbought self, for a poor woman,
That has been once sold, used, and lost her show?
I am a garment worn, a vessel cracked,
A soon untied, a Lily trod upon,
A fragrant flower cropped by another hand,
My colour sullied, and my odour changed,
If when I was new blossomed, I did fear
My self unworthy of Mirandas spring:
Thus over-blown, and seeded, I am rather
Fit to adorn his Chimney, then his bed.
Rise miracle: save Malta, with thy virtue,
If words could make me proud, how has she spoke,
Yet I will try her to the very block:
Hard-hearted, and uncivil Oriana,
Ungrateful payer of my industries,
That with a soft painted hypocrisy
Cozen'st, and geer'st my perturbation,
Expect a witty, and a fell revenge:
My comfort is, all men will think thee false,
Beside thy husband having been thus long 
(on this occasion) in my Fort, and power.
Isle hear no more words: Captain, let's away
With all care see to her: and you Lucinda
Attend her diligently: she is a wonder.
Have you found she was well delivered:
What, had she a good Mid-wife, is all well?
You are merry Norandine.
Why weep you, Lady?
Take the poor Babe along.
Madam it is here.
Dissembling death, why did thou let me live
To see this change, my greatest cause to grieve? 
A tender husband hast thou showed thy self
My dearest brother, and thy memory
After my life, in brazen Characters,
Shall monumentally be registered
To ages consequent, till times running hand,
Beats back the world to undistinguished Chaos,
And on the top of that thy name shall stand
Fresh, and without decay.
Oh honoured sir!
If hope of this, or any bliss to come
Could lift my load of grief off from my soul,
Or expiate the trespasse' against my wife,
That in one hours suspicion I begat,
I might be won to be a man again,
And fare like other husbands, sleep and eat,
Laugh, and forget my pleasing penitence;
But till old nature can make such a wife
Again, I vow ne'er to resume the order
And habits, that to men are necessary,
All breath i'll spend in sighs, all sound in groans,
And know no company but my wasting moans.
This will be wilful murder on your self,
Nor like a Christian doe you bear the chance
Which th'inscrutable will of heaven admits.
What would you have my weakness doe, that
Suffered it self thus to be practised on,
By a damned hell-hound, and his agent dam,
The impious mid-wife to obortive births,
And cruel instrument to his decrees?
By forgery they first assailed her life,
Heaven playing with us yet, in that, he wrought
My dearest friend, the servant to her virtue
To combat me, against his Mistress truth.
That yet effectless, this enchanting witch,
Bred baneful jealousy against my Lady,
My most immaculate Lady, which seized on her
Almost to death: Oh yet! not yet content,
She in my hand put (to restore her life
As I imagined) what did execute
Their devilish malice, farther, great with child,
Was this poor innocent, that too was lost,
They doubled death upon her, not staying there,
They have done violence unto her Tomb,
Not granting rest unto her in the grave:
I wish Miranda had enjoyed my prize;
For sure I'm punished for usurping her,
Oh what a Tiger is resisted Lust?
How it doth forage all?
Part of this tale
I grant you true; but it was not poison given her.
I would it had, we had been far enough,
If we had been so wise, and had not now
Stood curtsing for your mercies here.
Beside,
What is become of the body? we know not.
Peace impudents,
And dear Gomera practise patience
As I my self must, by some means at last
We shall dissolve this riddle.
Wherefore comes
This villain in the festival array,
As if he triumphed for his treachery?
That is by our appointment: give us leave,
You shall know why a non. 
One of the Esguard.
The Gentlemen are come,
Truyce then a while
With our sad thoughts; what are you both resolved?
Not I my Lord: your down right Captain still
Isle live, and serve you, not that altogether
I want compunction of conscience,
I have enough to save me, and that's all,
Bar me from drink, and drabs, even hang me too,
You must even make your Captains capons first,
I have too much flesh for this spiritual Knighthood,
And therefore do desire forbearance, sir,
Till I am older, or more mortifide,
I am too sound yet.
What say you Miranda?
With all pure zeal to Heaven, duty to you,
I come to undergo it.
Proceed to the ceremony.
Before you match with this bright honoured title,
Admired Miranda, pardon what in thought
I ever did transgress against your virtue,
And may you find more joy with your new bride
Then poor Gomera ere in joyd with his.
But it was mine own crime, and I suffer for it:
Long wear your dignity, and worthily,
Whilst I obscurely in some corner vanish,
Have stronger thoughts, and better, first I crave
According to the order of the Court
I may dispose my captives, and the fort,
That with a clean and purified heart
The fittiler I may endue my robe.
Tic granted. 
Bring the captives. To your charge
And staid tuition my most noble friend;
I then commend this Lady; start not off
A fairer, and a chaster never lived;
By her own choice you are her Guardian,
For telling her I was to leave my fort,
And to abandon quite all worldly cares.
Her own request was, to Gomeras hands
She might be given in custody, for sh'ad heard
He was a Gentleman wise, and temperate,
Full of humanity to womankind,
And cause he had bin married knew the better
How to entrat a Lady.
What Country woman is she?
Borne a Greek.
Gomera, twill be barbarous to deny
A Lady, that unto your refuge flies,
And seeks to shroud her under virtues wing.
Excuse me noble sir; oh think me not
So dull a devil, to forget the loss
Of such a matchless wife as I possessed,
And ever to endure the sight of woman:
Were she the abstract of her sex for form,
The only warehouse of perfection,
Where there no Rose, nor Lily but her Cheek,
No Music but her tongue; virtue but hers;
She must not rest near me, my vow is graven,
Here in my heart, irrevocably breathed
And when I break it,
This is rudeness Spaniard,
Unseasonably you play the Timonist,
Put on a disposition is not yours,
Which neither fits you, nor becomes you.
Sir.
We cannot force you but we would persuade.
Beseech you Sir, no more I am resolved
To forsake Malta, tread a Pilgrimage
To fair Jerusalem, for my Ladies soul,
And will not be diverted.
You must bear
This Child along 'we then.
What Child?
How's this?
Nay then Gomera, thou art injurious,
This child is thine, and this rejected Lady
Thou hast as often known, as thine own wife,
And this I'll make good on thee, with my sword.
Thou durst as well blaspheme: if such a scandal
(I crave the rights due to a Gentleman)
Women unveil.
Will you refuse me yet?
My wife!
My sister!
Some body, thank Heaven
I cannot speak.
All praise be ever given:
This saves our lives, yet would she had bin dead;
The very sight of her afflicts me more
Then fear of punishment, or my disgrace.
How came you to the Temple?
Sir, to do
My poor devotions, and to offer thanks
For scoping a temptation ne'er performed
With this fair virgin. I restore a wife
Earth cannot parallel: and busy nature
If thou wilt still make women, but remember
To work 'em by this sampler; take heed sir,
Henceforth you never doubt sir.
When I do
Death take me suddenly.
To increase your happiness
To your best wife, take this addition.
Alack, my poor knave.
The confession
The Moor made 't seems was truth.
Mary was it sir; the only truth that ever issud out of hell, which her black jaws resemble; a plague of your bacon-face, you must be giving drinks with a ven∣gance; ah thou branded bitch: do'ye stare, gogles, I hope to make winter boots of thy hide yet, she fears not damning: hell fire cannot parch her blacker then she is: do'ye grin, chimney sweeper.
What is it Mranda?
That you would please Lucinda might attend you.
That suit sir, I consent not to.
My husband?
My dearest Angelo?
More liggam bobs; is not this the fellow that swam
Like a duck to th'shoare in our sea-service?
The very same, do not you know me now sir,
My name is Angelo, though Colonna veiled it,
Your Countryman, and kinsman born in Florence,
Who from the neighbour Island here of Goza
Whose captive lead, in that unfortunate day
When the Turk bore with him three thousand souls;
Since in Constantinople have I lived
Where I beheld this Turkish Damsel first.
A tedious suitor was I for her love,
And pitying such a beauteous case should hide
A soul profaned with infidelity,
I labourd her conversion with my love,
And doubly won her, to fair faith her soul
She first betrothed, and then her faith to me,
But fearful there to consummate this contract
We fled, and in that flight were tan again
By those same Galleys, fore Valletta fought.
Since in your service I attended her,
Where, what I saw, and heard, hath joyed me more
Then all my past afflictions grieved before.
Wonders crown wonders: take thy wife Miranda.
Be henceforth called our Malta's better angel,
And thou her evil Mountferrat.
We'll call him Cacodemon, with his block gibe there, his Succuba, his devils seed, his spawn of Phlege∣ton, that of my conscience was bred of the spume of Cocitus; do ye snarl you black jill? she looks lie the Picture of America.
Why stay we now.
This last petition to the Court,
I may bequeath the keeping of my Fort
To this my kinsman, toward the maintenance
Of him, and his fair virtuous wife; discreet,
Loyal, and valiant I dare give him you.
You must not ask in vain, sir.
My best thanks
To you my noble Cozen, and my service
To the whole Court; may I deserve this bounty.
Proceed to th'ceremony, one of our Esguard
Degrade Mountferrat first
I will not sue
For mercy, it were in vain; fortune thy worst. 
See see, the stain of honour, virtues foe,
Of Virgins fair fems, the foul overthrow,
That broken hath his oath of chastity
Dishonoured much this holy dignity,
Off with his Robe, expel him forth this place,
Whilst we rejoice, and sing at his disgrace.
Since by thy actions thou hast made thy self
Unworthy of that worthy sign thou wear•st,
And of our sacred order, into which
For former virtues, we received thee first,
According to our Statutes, Ordinances,
For praise unto the good, a terror to
The bad, and an example to all men;
We here deprive thee of our habit, and
Declare thee unworthy our society,
From which we do expel thee, as a rotten
Corrupted, and contagious member.
Using th'authority th'Superiour
Hath given unto me, I untie this knot,
And take from thee the pleasing yoke of heaven:
We take from off thy breast this holy cross,
Which thou hast made thy burden, not thy prop;
Thy spurs we spoil thee off, eleaving thy heals
Bare of thy honour, that have kicked against
Our orders precepts: next we reave thy sword,
And give thee armelesse to thy enemies,
For being foe to goodness, and to God,
Last, about thy stiff neck, we this halter hang,
And leave thee to the mercy of the Court.
Invest Miranda.
Fair child of virtue, honours bloom
That here with burning zeal dost come
With joy to ask the white cross cloak,
And yield unto this pleasing yoke
That being young, vows chastity,
And choose wilful poverty;
As this flame mounts, so mount thy zeal, thy glory
Rise past the Stars, and fix in Heaven thy story.
What crave you gentle sir?
Humble admittance
To be a brother of the holy Hospital
Of great Jerusalem.
Breath out your vow.
To heaven and all the bench of Saints above
Whose succour I implore t'enhable me,
I vow henceforth a chaste life, not to enjoy
Any thing proper to my self; obedience
To my superiors, whom Religion,
And Heaven shall give me: ever to defend
The virtuous fame of Ladies, and to oppugn
Even unto death the Christian enemy,
This do I vow to accomplish.
Who can tell,
He has he made other vow, or promised marriage
To any one, or is in servitude?
He's free from all these.
Put on his spurs, and girt him with the sword,
The scourge of infidels, and tips of speed.
Buildst thy faith on this
On him that died
On such a sacred figure, for our sins.
Here, then we fix it on thy left side, for
Thy increase of faith, Christian defence, and service
To th'poor, and thus near to thy heart we plant it
That thou moist love it even with all thy heart,
With thy right hand protect, preserve it whole,
For if thou fighting against heavens enemies
Shall fly away, abandoning the cross
The Ensign of thy holy General,
With shame thou justly shalt be robed of it
Chased from our company, and cut away
As an infectious putrefied limb.
I ask no favour.
Then receive the yoke
Of him that makes it sweet, and light, in which
Thy soul find her eternal rest.
Most welcome.
Welcome, our noble brother.
Break up the Court; Mountferrat, though your deeds
Conspiring against the lives of innocents
Hath forfeited your own, we will not stain
Our white Cross with your blood: your doom is then
To marry this coagent of your mischiefs
Which done, we banish you the continent,
If either, after three days here be found
The hand of Law, lays hold upon your lives.
Away French stallion, now you have a Barberry mare of your own, go leap her, and engender young devillings.
We will find something, noble Norandine
To quit your merit: so to civil feasts,
According to our customs; and all pray
The dew of grace, bless our new Knight to day. 

