THe General is returned then?
With much honour.
And peace concluded with the Prince of Argos?
To the Queens wishes: the conditions signed
So far beyond her hopes, to the advantage
Of Corinth, and the good of all her Subjects;
That though Leonidas our brave General
Ever came home a fair and great example,
He never yet returned, or with less loss
Or more deserved honour.
Have you not heard
The motives to this general good?
The maine one
Was admiration first in young Agenor,
(For by that name we know the Prince of Argos)
Of our Leonidas wisdom, and his valour,
Which though an enemy, first in him bred wonder;
That liking, Love succeeded that, which was
Followed by a desire to be a friend
Upon what terms soever to such goodness;
They had an interview; and that their friendship
Might with our peace be ratified, it was concluded,
Agenor yielding up all such strong places
As he held in our Territories, should receive
(With a sufficient Dower, paid by the Queen)
The fair Marion for his wife.
But how
Approves the Queen of this? since we well know,
Nor was her Highness ignoant, that her Son
The Prince Theanor made love to this Lady,
And in the noblest way.
Which she allowed of,
And I have heard from some familiar with
Her nearest secrets, she so deeply prized her
Being from an Infant trained up in her service,
(Or to speak better, rather her own Creature)
She once did say, That if the Prince should steal
A Marriage without her leave, or knowledge,
With this Marion, with a little suit
She should grant both their pardons: where as now
To show her self forsooth a Spartan Lady,
And that it is in her power, now it concerns
The common good, not alone to subdue
Her own affections, but command her Sons;
She has not only forced him with rough threats
To leave his Mistress, but compelled him when
Agenor made his entrance into Corinth
To wait upon his Rival.
Can it be
The Prince should sit down with this wrong?
I know not,
I am sure I should not.
Trust me nor I,
A Mother is a name, but put in balance
With a young wench it is nothing; where did you leave him?
Near Vista's Temple, for there he dismissed me,
And full of troubled thoughts, calling for Crates:
He went with him, but whither or to what purpose
I am a stranger.
They are come back Neanthes.
I like the place well.
Well Sir? it is built
As if the Architect had been a Prophet,
And fashioned it alone for this nights action;
The vaults so hollow, and the walls so strong,
As Dian there might suffer violence,
And with loud shrikes in vain call Jove to help her;
Or should he hear, his thunder could not find
An entrance to it.
I give up my self
Wholly to thy direction, worthiest Crates;
And yet the desperate cure that we must practice
Is in it self so foul, and full of danger,
That I stand doubtful whether it were more manly
To dye not seeking help, or that help being
So deadly, to pursue it.
To those reasons
I have already urged, I will add these.
For but consider Sir—
It is of weight
What ere it be, that with such vehement action,
Of eye, hand, foot, nay all his bodies motion,
Crates incites the Prince to.
Then observe,
With what variety of passions he
Receives his reasons; now he's pale, and shakes
For fear or anger; now his natural red
Comes back again, and with a pleasing smile
He seems to entertain it; it is resolved on
Be it what twill: to his ends may it prosper
Though the State sink for it.
Now you are a Prince
Fit to rule others, and in shaking off
The Bonds in which your Mother fetters you
Discharge your debt to nature, she's your guide,
Follow her boldly Sir.
I am confirmed,
Fall what may fall,
Yet still disguise your malice
In your humility.
I am instructed.
Though in your heart there rage a thousand tem∣pests,
All calmness in your looks.
I shall remember.
And at no hand, though these are used as agents
Acquaint them with your purpose till the instant
That we employ them; tic not fit they have
Time to consider, when it is done, reward
Or fear will keep them silent: yet you may
Grace them as you pass by, twill make them surer,
And greedier to deserve you.
Isle move only
As you would have me: Good day gentlemen;
Nay, spare this ceremonious form of duty
To him that brings love to you, equal love,
And is in nothing happier, then in knowing
It is returned by you; we are as one.
I am ore-joyd, I know not
How to reply: but—
Hang all buts; my Lord,
For this your bounteous favour—
Let me speak,
If to feed Vultures hereafter the halter
Has done his part, or if there be a Hell
To take a swindge or two there, may deserve this.
We are ready.
Try us any way.
Put us to it.
What jewels I have in you?
Have these souls,
That for a good look, and a few kind words
Part with their essence?
Since you will compel me
To put that to the trial, which I doubt not,
Crates may be suddenly will instruct you
How, and in what to show your loves; obey him
As you would bind me to you.
Tic well grounded;
Leave me to rear the building.
We will doe.
I know it.
Any thing you'll put us to. 
Sister, I reap the harvest of my labours
In your preferment, be you worthy of it,
And with an open bosom entertain
A greater fortune then my love durst hope for;
Be wise, and welcome it: play not the coy
And foolish wanton, with the offered bounties
Of him that is a Prince. I was wooed for you,
And won Marion: then if you dare
Believe the object that took me was worthy,
Or trust my judgement, in me think you were
Courted, sued to, and conquered.
Noble brother,
I have, and still esteem you as a Father,
And will as far obey you; my heart speaks it:
And yet without your anger give me leave
To say, That in the choice of that on which
All my lifes joys or sorrows have dependence,
It had been fit ere you had made a full
And absolute grant of me to any other,
I should have used mine own eyes, or at least
Made you to understand, whether it were
Within my power to make a second gift
Of my poor self.
I know what tic you point at,
The Prince Theanos love; let not that cheat you;
His vows were but mere courtship; all his service
But practise how to entrap a credulous Lady:
Or grant it serious, yet you must remember
He's not to love but where the Queen his Mother
Must give allowance, which to you is barred up:
And therefore study to forget that ever
You cherished such a hope.
I would I could.
But brave Agenor, who is come in person
To celebrate this Marriage, for your love
Forgives the forfeit of ten thousand lives,
That must have fallen under the sword of war
Had not this peace been made; which general good
Both Countries owe to his affection to you:
O happy Sister, ask this noble Lady
Your bosom friend (since I fail in my credit)
What palm Agenors name above all Princes
That Greece is proud of carries, and with lustre.
Indeed fame gives him out of excellent;
And friend, I doubt not but when you shall see him
He'll so appear to you. Art sure it is he?
As I live Madam—
Virtue enable me to contain my joy.
It is my Euphanes.
Yes.
And he's in health?
Most certainly Madam,
Isle see him instantly.
So prithee tell him. 
I yield my self too weak
In argument to oppose you: you may lead me
Whither you please.
It is answered like my Sister;
And if in him you find not ample cause
To pray for me, and daily on your knees,
Conclude I have no judgement.
May it prove so:
Friend, shall we have your company?
Two hours hence
I will not fail you.
At your pleasure Madam. 
Could I in one word speak a thousand welcomes
(And hearty ones) you have 'em: Fie, my hand,
We stand at no such distance, by my life
The parting kiss you took before your travel
Is yet a virgin on my lips, preserved
With as much care as I would doe my fame,
To entertain your wished return.
Best Lady,
That I doe honour you, and with as much reason
As ever man did virtue; that I love you,
Yet look upon you with that reverence
As holy men behold the Sun, the Stars,
The Temples, and their gods, they all can witness;
And that you have deserved this duty from me;
The life, and means of life, for which I owe you,
Commands me to profess it, since my fortune
Affords no other payment.
Good Euphanes, where benefits are ill conferred,
I had thought,
That for the trifling courtesies as I call them,
(Though you give them another name) you had
Made ample satisfaction in the acceptance,
And therefore did presume you had brought home
Some other Language.
No one I have learned
Yields words sufficient to express your goodness;
Nor can I ever choose another theme
And not be thought unthankful.
Pray you no more
As you respect me.
That charm is too powerful
For me to disobey it: It is your pleasure,
And not my boldness Madam.
Good Euphanes,
Believe I am not one of those weak Ladies,
That (barren of all inward worth) are proud
Of what they cannot truly call their own,
Their birth or fortune, which are things without them,
Nor in this will I imitate the world,
Whose greater part of men think when they give
They purchase bondsman, not make worthy friends:
By all that's good I swear, I never thought
My great estate was an addition to me,
Or that your wants took from you.
There are few
So truly understanding or themselves
Or what they doe possess.
Good Euphanes,
Where benefits
Are ill conferred as to unworthy men,
That turn them to bad uses, the bestower
For wanting judgement how, and on whom to place them,
Is partly guilty: but when we do favours
To such as make them grounds on which they build
Their noble actions, there we improve our fortunes
To the most fair advantage. If I speak
Too much, though I confess I speak well,
Prithee remember it is a women's weakness,
And then thou wilt forgive it.
You speak nothing
But what would well become the wisest man:
And that by you delivered is so pleasing
That I could hear you ever.
Fly not from
Your word, for I arrest it: and will now
Express my self a little more, and prove
That whereas you profess your self my debtor,
That I am yours.
Your Ladyship then must use
Some Sophistry I ne'er heard of.
By plain reasons,
For look you, had you never sunk beneath
Your wants, or if those wants had found supply
From Crates, your unkind and covetous brother,
Or any other man, I then had missed
A subject upon which I worthily
Might exercise my bounty: whereas now
By having happy opportunity
To furnish you before, and in your travels,
With all conveniences that you thought useful,
That Gold which would have rusted in my Coffers
Being thus employed, has rendered me a partner
In all your glorious actions. And whereas
Had you not been, I should have died a thing.
Scarce known, or soon forgotten: there's no Trophy
In which Euphanes for his worth is mentioned,
But there you have been careful to remember,
That all the good you did came from Beliza.
That was but thankfulness.
It was such an honour,
And such a large return for the poor trash.
I ventured with you, that if I should part
With all that I possess, and my self too
In satisfaction for it, it were still short
Of your deservings.
You o're-prize them Madam.
The Queen her self hath given me gracious thanks
In your behalf, for she hath heard Euphanes
How gallantly you have maintained her honour
In all the Courts of Greece: and rest assured,
(Though yet unknown) when I present you to her,
Which I will doe this evening, you shall find
That she intends good to you.
Worthiest Lady,
Since all you labour for is the advancement
Of him that will live ever your poor servant,
He must not contradict it.
Here's your Brother,
It is strange to see him here.
You are welcome home Sir,
(Your pardon Madam) I had thought my house,
Considering who I am, might have been worthy
Of your first visit.
It was not open to me
When last I saw you; and to me it is wonder
That absence which still renders men forgotten
Should make my presence wished for.
That's not it,
Your too kind Brother understanding that
You stand in no need of him, is bold to offer
His entertainment.
He had never wanted,
Or yours, or your assistance, had he practised
The way he might have took, to have commanded
What ever I call mine,
I studied many,
But could find none.
You would not find your self Sir,
Or in your self what was from you due to me:
The privilege my birth bestowed upon me
Might challenge some regard.
You had all the Land Sir,
What else did you expect? and I am certain
You kept such strong Guards to preserve it yours
I could force nothing from you.
Did you ever
Demand help from me?
My wants have, and often,
With open mouths, but you nor heard, nor saw them;
May be you looked I should petition to you
As you went to your Horse; flatter your servants,
To play the Brokers for my furtherance,
Sooth your worse humours, Act the Parasite
On all occasions, write my name with theirs
That are but one degree removed from slaves,
Be drunk when you would have me, then wench with you,
Or play the Pander; enter into Quarrels
Although unjustly grounded, and defend them
Because they were yours; these are the tyrannies
Most younger Brothers groan beneath; yet bear them
From the insulting Heir, selling their freedoms
At a less rate then what the State allows,
The salary of base and common Strumpets:
For my part, ere on such low terms I feed
Upon a Brothers trencher, let me dye
The Beggars death, and starve.
It is bravely spoken,
Did what you doe rank with it.
Why, what does he
You would not wish were yours?
Isle tell you Lady,
Since you rise up his Advocate, and boldly,
(For now I find, and plainly, in whose favour
My love and service to you was neglected)
For all your wealth, nay, add to that your beauty,
And put your virtues in if you have any,
I would not yet be pointed at, as he is,
For the fine Courtier, the women's man,
That tells my Lady stories, dissolves riddles,
Ushers her to Coach, lies at her feet
At solemn Masks, applauding what she laughs at;
Reads her asleep a nights, and takes his oath
Upon her Pantoffles, that all excellence
In other Madams doe but zany hers:
These you are perfect in, and yet these take not
Or from your birth or freedom.
Should another
Say this, my deeds, not looks should show—
Contemn it:
His envy fains this, and he's but reporter,
Without a second, of his own dry fancies.
Yes Madam, the whole City speaks it with me,
And though it may distaste, it is certain you
Are brought into the scene, and with him censured;
For you are given out for the provident Lady,
That not to be unfurnished for her pleasures
(As without them to what vain use is greatness)
Have made choice of an able man, a young man
Of an Herculean back to doe you service,
And one you may command too, that is active,
And does what you would have him.
You are foul mouthed.
That can speak well, write Verses too, and good ones,
Sharp and conceited, whose wit you may lie with
When his performance fails him; one you have
Maintained abroad to learn new ways to please you.
And by the gods you well reward him for it,
No night (in which while you lye sick and panting)
He watches by you but is worth a talent:
No conference in your Coach which is not paid with
A scarlet Suit; this the poor people mutter,
Though I believe, for I am bound to doe so,
A Lady of your youth, that feeds high too,
And a most exact Lady, may doe all this
Out of virtuous love, the last bought vizard
That Lechery purchased.
Not a word beyond this,
The reverence I owe to that one womb
In which we both were embrions, makes me suffer
What's past; but if continued—
Stay your hand,
The Queen shall right mine honour.
Let him doe it,
It is but marrying him; and for your anger
Know that I slight it: when your Goddess here
Is weary of your sacrifice, as she will be,
You know my house, and there amongst my servants
Perhaps you'll find a livery. 
Be not moved,
I know the rancour of his disposition,
And turn it on himself by laughing at it,
And in that let me teach you.
I learn gladly. 
You are met unto my wishes, if you ever
Desired true mirth so far as to adventure
To dye with the extremity of laughter,
I come before the object that will doe it;
Or let me live your fool.
Who is it Neanthes?
Lamprias the Usurers son.
Lamprias? the youth
Of six and fifty?
That was sent to travel
By rich Beliza, till he came to age,
And was fit for a Wife?
The very same,
This gallant with his Guardian, and his Tutor,
(And of the three who is most fool I know not)
Are newly come to Corinth, isle not stale them
By giving up their characters, but leave you
To make your own discoveries: here they are Sir.
That leg a little higher; very well.
Now put your face into the Travellors posture;
Exceeding good.
Doe you mark how they admire him?
They will be all my Scholars, when they know
And understand him truly.
Phoebus guard me
From this new Python.
How they have trimmed him up
Like an old Reveller?
Curled him and perfumed him,
But that was done with judgement, for he looks
Like one that purged perpetually; trust me,
That Witches face of his is painted too,
And every ditch upon it buries more
Then would set off ten Bawds, and all their tenants.
See how it moves towards us.
There's a salutation:
'Troth Gentlemen, you have bestowed much travel
In training up your Pupil.
Sir, great buildings
Require great labours, which yet we repent not,
Since for the Countries good we have brought home
An absolute man.
As any of his years,
Corinth can show you.
He's exceeding meagre.
His contemplation—
Besides, it is fit
Learners should be kept hungry.
You all contemplate;
For three such wretched pictures of lean famine
I never saw together.
We have fat minds Sir,
And travelled to save charges. Doe you think
It was fit a young and hopeful Gentleman
Should be brought up a glutton? he's my Ward,
Nor was there ever where I bore the bag
Any superfluous waste.
Pray you can it speak?
He knows all Languages, but will use none,
They are all too big for his mouth, or else too little
T'expresse his great conceits: and yet of late
With some ippulsion he hath set down
In a strange method by the way of question,
And briefly, to all business whatsoever
That may concern a Gentleman.
Good Sir, let's hear him.
Come on Sir.
They have taught him like an Ape,
To doe his tricks by signs: now he begins.
When shall we be drunk together?
That's the first.
Where shall we whore to night?
That ever follows.
Odds me, he now looks angry.
Shall we quarrel?
With me at no hand Sir.
Then let's protest.
Is this all?
These are Sir, the four new Virtues
That are in fashion: many a mile we measured
Before we could arrive unto this knowledge.
You might have spared that labour, for at home here
Ther's little else in practice: Ha? the Queen?
Good friends, for half an hour remove your motion,
To morrow willingly when we have more leisure
We will look on him again.
Did I not rarely?
Excellent well.
He shall have six Plumbs for it. 
How much my Court is honoured princely Brother
In your vouchasing it your longed for presence
Were tedious to repeat, since it is already
(And heartily) acknowledged; may the gods
That look into Kings actions smile upon
The league we have concluded; and their justice
Find me out to revenge it if I break
One article.
Great miracle of Queens,
How happy I esteem my self in being
Thought worthy to be numbered in the rank
Of your confederates, my love and best service
Shall teach the world hereafter: but this gift
With which you have confirmed it, is so far
Beyond my hopes and means ere to return,
That of necessity I must dye obliged
To your unanswered bounty.
The sweet Lady
In blushes gives your Highness thanks.
Believe it
On the Queens word, she is a worthy one,
And I am so acquainted with her goodness,
That but for this peace that hath changed my purpose,
And to her more advancement, I should gladly
Have called her Daughter.
Though I am deprived of
A blessing it is not in the Fates to equal,
To show my self a subject as a son,
Here I give up my claim, and willingly
With mine own hand deliver you what once
I loved above my self; and from this hour
(For my affection yields now to my duty)
Vow never to solicit her.
It is well covered
Neanthes, and the rest. 
Nay, for this night
You must (for it is our Country fashion Sir)
Leave her to her devotions, in the morning
We will bring you to the Temple.
How in this
Your Highness honours me?
Sweet rest to all.
This kiss, and I obey you.
Please it your Highness,
This is the Gentleman.
You are welcome home Sir,
(Now as I live, one of a promising presence)
I have heard of you before, and you shall find
Isle know you better: find out something that
May doe you good, and rest assured to have it.
Were you at Sparta lately?
Three days since
Madam I came from thence.
It is very late,
Good night my Lord; doe you Sir follow me,
I must talk further with you.
All rest with you. 
She must pass through this Cloister, suddenly
And boldly seize upon her.
Whore's the Prince?
He does expect us at the place I showed you.
I hear ones footing, peace, it is she;
Now leave me,
I know the way, though Vesta witness with me
I never trod it with such fear: help, help.
Stop her mouth close, out with the Light, isle guide you. 
TO whom now shall I cry? What power thus kneel to?
And beg my ravished honour back upon me?
Deaf, deaf, you gods of goodness, deaf to me,
Deaf Heaven to all my cries; deaf hope, deaf justice,
I am abused, and you that see all saw it;
Saw it, and smiled upon the villain did it:
Saw it, and gave him strength: why have I prayed to ye,
When all the worlds eyes have been sunk in slumbers?
Why have I then powered out my tears? kneeled to ye?
And from the Altar of a pure heart sent ye
Thoughts like, your selves, white, innocent, vows purer
And of a sweeter flame then all earths odours?
Why have I sung your praises, strewed your Temples,
And Crowned your holy Priests with Virgin Roses?
Is it we hold ye powerful, to destroy us?
Believe, and honour ye, to see us ruined?
These tears of anger thus I sprinckle toward ye,
You that dare sleep secure whilst Virgins suffer,
These stick like Comets, blaze eternally,
Till with the wonder they have waked your justice,
And forced ye fear our curses, as we yours.
My shame still follows me, and still proclames me;
He turns away in scorn, I am contemned too,
A more unmanly violence then the other;
Bitten, and flung away? What ere you are
Sir, you that have abused me, and now most basely
And sacrilegiously robed this fair Temple,
I fling all these behind me, but look upon me,
But one kind loving look, be what ye will,
So from this hour you will be mine, my Husband;
And you his hand in mischief, I speak to you too,
Counsel him nobly now; you know the mischief,
The most unrighteous act he has done, persuade him,
Persuade him like a friend, knock at his Conscience
Till fair Repentance follow: yet be worthy of me,
And show your self, if ever good thought guided ye,
You have had your foul will, make it yet fair with marriage;
Open your self and take me, wed me now: 
More fruits of Villainy? your Dagger? come
Ye are merciful, I thank ye for your medicine:
Is that too worthy too?
Devil, thou with him,
Thou penny Bawd to his Lust, will not that stir thee?
Do you work by tokens now? Be sure I live not,
For your own safeties knaves. I will sit patiently:
But as ye are true Villains, the Devils own servants,
And those he loves and trusts, make it as bloody
An Act, of such true horror Heaven would shake at,
Twill show the braver: goodness hold my hope fast,
And in thy mercies look upon my ruins,
And then I am right: my eyes grow dead and heavy:
Wrong me no more as ye are men.
She is fast.
Away with her. 
Now Gentlemen, the time's come now t'enjoy
That fruitful happiness my heart has longed for:
This day be happy called, and when old Time
Brings it about each year, crowned with that sweetness
It gives me now, see every man observe it,
And laying all aside bears show of business,
Give this to joy and triumph: How sits my clothes?
Handsome, and wondrous well Sir.
Do they show richly?
For to those curious eyes even beauty envies,
I must not now appear poor, or low fashioned;
Me thinks I am younger then I was, far younger;
And such a promise in my blood I feel now,
That if there may be a perpetual youth
Bestowed on man, I am that soul shall win it:
Do's my hair stand well, Lord how ill-favourdly
You have dressed me to day? how baldly? why this Cloak?
Why it is the richest Sir.
And here ye have put me on
A pair of Breeches look like a pair of Bagpipes.
Believe Sir, they show bravely.
Why these Stockings?
Your Leg appears—
Peuh I would have had 'em peach colour,
All young, and new about me: and this Scarf here
A goodly thing: you have tricked me like a Puppet.
Isle undertake to rig forth a whole Navy,
And with less labour then one man in love,
They are never pleased.
Me thinks he looks well.
Well
As man can look, as handsome: now do I wonder
He found not fault his Nose was put on ugly,
Or his Eyes looked too gray, and rail at us,
They are the waywards things, these Lovers.
All will be right
When once it comes to the push.
I would they were at it
For our own quiet sake.
Come, wait upon me,
And bear your selves like mine, my friends, and nobly. 
This is her Brothers Door.
There lay her down then.
Lay her along: she is fast still.
As forgetfulness.
Be not you stirred now, but away to your Mother,
Give all attendance, let no stain appear
Of fear, or doubt in your face: carry your self confidently.
But whither runs your drift now?
When she wakes,
Either what's done will show a mere dream to her,
And carry no more credit: or say she find it,
Say she remember all the circumstances,
Twenty to one the shapes in which they were acted,
The horrors, and the still affrights we showed her,
Rising in wilder figures to her memory
Will run her mad, and no man guess the reason:
If all these fail, and that she rise up perfect,
And so collect her self, believe this Sir,
Not knowing who it was that did this to her,
Nor having any power to guess; the thing done too,
Being the utter undoing of her Honour
If it be known, and to the worlds eye published,
Especially at this time when Fortune courts her,
She must and will conceal it; nay, forget it,
The woman is no Lucrece; get you gone Sir,
And as you would have more of this sport, fear not.
I am confirmed, farewell.
Farewell, away Sir:
Disperse your selves, and as you love his favour,
And that that crowns it, Gold, no tongues amongst ye.
You know your charge, this way goes no suspicion. 
You are stirring early Sir.
It was my duty
To wait upon your Grace.
How fares your Sister,
My beauteous Mistress, what is she ready yet?
No doubt she'll lose no time Sir, young Maids in her way
Tread upon thorns, and think an hour an age
Till the Priest has done his part, that theirs may follow:
I saw her not since yesterday in the evening:
But Sir, I am sure she is not slack; believe me,
Your grace will find a loving soul.
A sweet one,
And so much joy I carry in the thought of it,
So great a happiness to know she is mine;
Believe me noble Brother, that to express it
Me thinks a Tongue's a poor thing, can do nothing,
Imagination less: who's that that lies there?
Where Sir?
Before the door, it looks like a woman:
This way I came abroad, but then there was nothing,
One of the Maids o're-watch'd belike.
It may be.
But me thinks this is no fit place to sleep in.
It is sure a woman Sir, she has Jewels on too:
She fears no foul play sure.
Bring a Torch hither,
Yet it is not perfect day: I should know those Garments.
How sound she sleeps?
I am sorry to see this.
Do you know her?
And you now I am sure Sir.
My Mistress, how comes this?
The Queen and her train?
You know my pleasure.
And will be most careful.
Be not long absent, the suit you preferred
Is granted.
This fellow mounts apace, and will
Tower o'er us like a Falcon.
Good morrow to ye all, why stand ye wondering?
Enter the house Sir, and bring out your Mistress,
You must observe our Ceremonies: what's the matter?
What's that ye stand at? How Marion?
Asleep in the street? belike some sudden Palsy
As she stepped out last night upon devotion,
To took her farewell of her Virgin state,
The Ayre being sharp and piercing, struck her suddenly:
See if she breath.
A little.
Wake her then,
It is sure a fit.
She wakes her self,
Give room to her.
See how the spirits struggle to recover,
And strongly re-inforce their strengths; for certain
This was no natural sleep.
I am of your mind Madam.
No Son, it cannot be.
Pray Heaven no trick in it;
Good soul she little merits such a mischief.
She is broad awake now, and her sense clears up,
It was sure a fit; stand off.
The Queen, my Love here,
And all my noble friends? Why where am I?
How am I trounced, and moaped? in the street? Heaven bless me,
Shame to my Sex; of the ground too? O, I remember—
How wilde she looks?
Oh my cold heart, how she trembles?
O I remember, I remember.
What's that?
My shame, my shame, my shame: O I remember
My never-dying shame.
Here has been villainy.
I fear so to.
You are no Furies are ye?
No horrid shapes sent to affright me?
No sweet,
We are your friends: look up, I am Agenor,
O my Marion, that loves you dearly:
And come to marry ye.
Sister, what aisle ye?
Speak out your griefs, and boldly—
Something sticks here
Will choke ye else.
I hope it will.
Be free Lady,
You have your loving friends about ye.
Dear Marion,
By the unspotted love I ever bore ye,
By thine own goodness—
O it is gone, it is gone Sir,
I am now I know not what: pray ye look not on me,
No name is left me, nothing to inherit
But that detested, base, and branded —
Speak it,
And how; diseases of most danger
Their causes once discovered are easily cured:
My fair Marion.
I thank your love Sir;
When I was fair Marion, unspotted,
Pure, and unblasted in the bud you honoured,
White as the heart of truth, then Prince Agenor,
Even then I was not worthy of your favour;
Wretch that I am, less worthy now of pity:
Let no good thing come near me, virtue fly me;
You that have honest noble names despise me,
For I am nothing now but a maine pestilence
Able to poison all. Send those unto me
That have forgot their names, ruined their fortunes,
Despised their honours; those that have been Virgins
Ravished and wronged, and yet dare live to tell it.
Now it appears too plain.
Send those sad people
That hate the light, and curse society;
Whose thoughts are Graves, and from whose eyes continually
Their melting souls drop out, send those to me;
And when their sorrows are most excellent,
So full that one grief more cannot be added,
My Story like a torrent shall devour 'em.
Hark, it must out; but pray stand close together,
And let not all the world hear.
Speak it boldly.
And Royal Lady, think but charitably,
Your Grace has known my breeding.
Prithee speak it.
Is there no stranger here? send off your servants,
And yet it must be known: I shake.
Sweet Mistress.
I am abused, basely abused; do you guess yet?
Come close isle tell ye plainer; I am Whored,
Ravished, and robbed of Honour.
O the Devil.
What hellish Slave was this?
A wretch, a wretch,
A damned wretch: do you know the Villain Lady?
No.
Not by guess?
O no.
It must be known.
Where was the place?
I know not neither.
O Heaven,
Is this the happy time? my hope to this come?
Neither the man, nor circumstances?
His tongue,
Did you not hear his tongue, no voice?
None, none Sir:
All I know of him was his violence.
How came ye hither Sweet?
I know not neither.
A cunning piece of Villainy.
All I remember
Is only this: Going to Vistas Temple
To give the Goddess my last Virgin prayers,
Near to that place I was suddenly surprised,
By five or six disguised, and from thence violently
To my dishonour hauled: that Act performed,
Brought back, but how, or whether, till I waked here.—
This is so monstrous the gods cannot suffer it;
I have not read in all the villainies
Committed by the most obdurate Rascals,
An act so truly impious.
Would I knew him.
He must be known, the Devil cannot hide him.
If all the Art I have, or power can do it,
He shall be found, and such a way of justice
Inflicted on him: A Lady wronged in my Court,
And this way robed, and ruined?
Be contented Madam,
If he be above ground I will have him.
Fair virtuous Maid, take comfort yet and flourish,
In my love flourish: the stain was forced upon ye
None of your wills, nor yours; rise, and rise mine still,
And rise the same white, sweet, fair soul, I loved ye,
Take me the same.
I kneel and thank ye Sir,
And I must say ye are truly honourable,
And dare confess my will yet still a Virgin;
But so unfit and weak a Cabinet
To keep your love and virtue in am I now,
That have been forced and broken, lost my lustre,
I mean this body, so corrupt a Volume
For you to study goodness in, and honour,
I shall entreat your Grace, confer that happiness
Upon a beauty sorrow never saw yet:
And when this grief shall kill me, as it must do,
Only remember yet ye had such a Mistress;
And if ye then dare shed a tear, yet honour me:
Good Gentlemen express your pities to me,
In seeking out this villainy; and my last suit
Is to your Grace, that I may have your favour
To live a poor recluse Nun with this Lady,
From Court and Company, till Heaven shall hear me,
And send me comfort, or death end my misery.
Take your own will, my very heart bleeds for thee.
Farewell Marion, since I have not thee
Isle wed thy goodness, and thy memory.
And I her fair revenge.
Away: let's follow it,
For he is so rank in the wind we cannot miss him. 
Conon you are welcome home, ye are wondrous welcome,
Is this your first arrival?
Sir, but now
I reached the Town.
Ye'ar once more welcome then.
I thank ye noble Sir.
Pray ye do me the honour
To make my poor house first—
Pray Sir excuse me,
I have not seen mine own yet; nor made happy
These longing eyes with those I love there: what's this a Tavern?
It seems so by the outside.
Step in here then,
And since it offers it self so freely to us,
A place made only for liberal entertainment,
Let's seek no further but make use of this,
And after the Greek fashion, to our friends,
Crown a round cup or two.
Your pleasure Sir.
Drawers, who waits within?
Anon, anon Sir.
Look into the Lilly-pot: why Mark there;
You are welcome Gentlemen; heartily welcome
My noble friend.
Let's have good Wine mine Host,
And a fine private room.
Will ye be there Sir?
What is it you'll drink? isle draw your Wine my self:
Quissions ye knaves: why when?
Anon, anon Sir.
Chios, or Lebos, Greek?
Your best and neatest.
Isle draw ye that shall dance.
Away, be quick then. 
How does your Brother Sir, my noble friend
The good Euphanes? in all my course of travel
I met not with a Gentleman so furnished
In gentleness and curtsy; believe Sir,
So many friendly Offices I received from him,
So great, and timely, and enjoyed his company
In such an open and a liberal sweetness,
That when I dare forget him—
He's in good health Sir,
But you will find him a much altered man,
Grown a great Courtier Sir.
He's worthy of it.
A man drawn up, that leaves no print behind him
Of what he was: those goodnesses you speak of
That have been in him, those that you call freedoms,
Societies, and sweetness, look for now Sir,
You'll find no shadows of them left, no sound,
The very Ayre he has lived in altered: now behold him,
And you shall see a thing walk by, look big upon ye,
And cry for place; I am the Queens, give room there:
If you bow low, may be he'll touch the Bonnet,
Or fling a forced smile at ye for a favour.
He is your brother Sir.
These forms put off,
Which travel, and Court Holy-water sprinkle on him,
I dare accept, and know him: you'll think it strange Sir,
That even to me, to me his natural Brother,
And one by birth he owes a little honour too—
(But that's all one) come give me some Wine, mine Host,
Here's to your fair return.
I wonder at it,
But sure he has found a nature not worth owning
In this way; else I know he is tender carried.
I thank ye Sir: and now durst I presume
For all you tell me of these alterations,
And stops in his sweet nature, which till I find so,
I have known him now so long, &amp; looked so through him,
You must give me leave to be a little faithless:
I say for all these, if you please to venture
Isle lay the Wine we drink, let me send for him
(Even I that am the poorest of his fellowship)
But by a Boy of the house too, let him have business,
Let him attend the Queen, nay let his Mistress
Hold him betwixt her arms, he shall come to me,
And shall drink with me too; love me, and heartily,
Like a true honest man bid me welcome home.
I am confident.
You will lose.
You'll stand to the wager?
With all my heart.
Go Boy, and tell Euphanes.
He's now gone up the street Sir,
With a great train of Gallants.
What think you now Sir?
Go, and overtake him,
Commend my love unto him: my name is Conon,
Tell him I am new arrived, and where I am,
And would request to see him presently:
Ye see I use old dudgeon phrase to draw him.
Isle hang and quarter when you draw him hither.
Away Boy.
I am gone Sir. 
Here's to you now,
And you shall find his travel has not stopped him
As you suppose, nor altered any freedom,
But made him far more clear and excellent;
It draws the grossness off the understanding,
And renders active and industrious spirits:
He that knows most men's manners, must of necessity
Best know his own, and mend those by example:
It is a dull thing to travel like a Mill-horse,
Still in the place he was borne in, lamed and blinded;
Living at home is like it: pure and strong spirits
That like the Fire still covet to fly upward,
And to give fire as well as take it; cased up, and mewed here
I mean at home, like lusty mottled Horses,
Only tied up in Stables, to please their Masters,
Beat out their fiery lives in their own Litters,
Why doe not you travel Sir?
I have no belief in it
I see so many strange things, half unhitched, to
Return, those that went out men, and good men,
They look like potch'd Eggs with the souls sucked out,
Empty and full of wind: all their affections
Are baked in Rye crust, to hold carriage
From this good Town to the other: and when they are opened,
They are so ill cooked and mouldy—
Ye are pleasant.
Isle show ye a pack of these: I have 'em for ye,
That have been long in travel too.
Please you Sir.
You know the Merchants walk, Boy?
Very well.
And you remember those Gentlemen were here
The other day with me?
Yes.
Then go thither,
For there I am sure they are, pray 'em come hither,
(And use my name) I would be glad to see 'em.
Your Brother's coming in Sir.
Odds my passion,
Out with the Plate ye knaves: bring the new Quishions,
And wash those Glasses I set by for high days,
Perfume the rooms along, why Sirrah.
Here Sir.
Bid my Wife make her self ready handsomely,
And put on her best Apron: it may be
The noble Gentleman will look upon her.
Where is he Boy?
Your worship's heartily welcome,
It joys my very heart to see ye here Sir.
The Gentleman that sent for your Honour—
O good mine Host.
To my poor homely house, and't like your honour.
I thank thine honour good mine Host, where is he?
What think ye now? my best Euphanes.
Conon, welcome my friend, my noble friend how is it?
are you in safety come, in health?
All health, all safety,
Riches, and all that makes content and happiness
Now I am here I have: how have you fared Sir?
Well, I thank Heaven, and never nearer friend
To catch at great occasion.
Indeed I joy in it.
Nor am I for my self borne in these fortunes,
In truth I love my friends.
You were noble ever.
I thought you have not known me.
Yes, ye are my Brother,
My elder Brother too, would your affections
Were able but to ask that love I owe to ye,
And as I give, preserve it: here friend Conon,
To your fair welcome home.
Dear Sir, I thank ye,
Fill it to the brim, Boy: Crates.
Isle pledge you,
But for that glorious Comet lately fired.
Fie, fie Sir, fie.
Nay, let him take his freedoms,
He stirs not me I vow to ye: much less staines me.
Sir, I cannot talk with that neat travelling tongue.
As I live, he has the worst belief in men abroad.
I am glad I am come home.
Here are the Gentlemen.
O let 'em enter: now you that trust in travel,
And make sharp Beards, and little Breeches Deities,
You that enhance the daily price of Tooth-picks,
And hold there is no homebred happiness,
Behold a model of your minds and actions.
Though this be envious, yet done in the way of mirth,
I am content to thank ye for it.
It is well yet.
Let the Mask enter.
A pretty Tavern faith, of a fine structure.
Bear your self like a Gentleman, here's six pence,
And be sure you break no Glasses.
Hark ye Pupil,
Go as I taught you, hang more upon your hams,
and put your knees out bent: there, yet a little:
Now I beseech ye, be not so improvident
To forget your travelling pace, it is a maine posture,
And to all unayr'd Gentlemen will betray you:
Play with your Pisa Beard: why, whore's your brush Pupil?
He must have a Brush Sir.
More charge yet?
Here, take mine,
These elements of travel he must not want Sir.
Ma' foy, he has had some nineteen pence in elements,
What would you more?
Durus me hercle pater.
What Monsieur Onos, the very pump of travel,
Sir, as I live you have done me the greatest kindness,
O my fair Sir, Lampree, the careful Uncle
To this young hopeful issue; Monsieur Tutor too,
The father to his mind; Come, come, let's hug Boys,
Why what a bunch of travel doe I embrace now,
Me thinks I put a Girdle about Europe;
How has the Boy profited?
He has enough Sir,
If his too fiery mettle doe not mar it.
Is he not thrifty yet?
That's all his fault,
Too bounteous minded being under age too,
A great consumer of his stock in Pippins▪
Had ever a hot stomach.
Come hither Onos,
Will you love me for this fine Apple?
We.
And will ye be ruled by me sometimes?
Faith I will.
That's a good Boy.
Pray give me not the child so much fruit,
He's of a raw Complexion.
You Monsieur hard egg,
Do you remember me? Doe you remember
When you and your Consort travelled through Hungary?
He's in that circuit still.
Do you remember
The cantell of immortal Cheese ye carried with ye,
The half cold Cabbedge, in a leather Sachell,
And those invincible Eggs that would lye in your bowels
A fortnight together, and then turn to bedstaves;
Your sour milk that would choke an Irish man,
And bread was baked in Caesars time for the Army?
Providence, providence.
The soul of travel.
Can the Boy speak yet?
Yes, and as fine a Gentleman,
I thank my able knowledge, he has arrived at,
Only a little sparing of his Language,
Which every man of observation—
And of as many tongues.
Pray be content Sir,
You know you are for the bodily part, the Purse,
I for the magazine, the mind.
Come hither springall.
That in the Almain Tongue signifies a Gentleman.
What think you of the forms of Italy or Spain?
I love mine own Country Pippin.
Nobly answered,
Borne for his Country first.
A great Philosopher:
What Horses do you prefer?
The White horse Sir,
There were I lye; honest and a just beast,
O Caput lepidum: a Child to say this,
Are these figures for the mouths of Infants?
Onos, what wenches?
Come, tell me true.
I cannot speak without book.
When shall we have one, ha?
Steal me from mine Uncle,
For look you, I am broke out horribly
For want of fleshly Physic: they say I am too young,
And that twill spoil my growth▪ but could you help me?
Meet me to morrow man, no more.
You think now
Ye have opened such a shame to me of travel,
By showing these thin Cubbs: ye have honoured us
Against your will, proclaimed us excellent:
Three Frailes of Sprats carried from Mart, to Mart,
Are as much meat as these, to more use travelled;
A bunch of blotted fools: me thinks your judgement
Should look abroad sometimes without your envy.
Such are most of you: so I take my leave,
And when you find your women's favour fail,
It is ten to one yoa'l know your self, and seek me
Upon a better Muster of your manners.
This is not handsome Sir.
Pray take your pleasure,
You wound the wind as much—
Come you with me,
I have business for you presently: there's for your Wine,
I must confess I lost it.
Shall I steal to ye
And shall we see the Wench?
A dainty one.
And have a dish of Pippins?
What a peck man.
Will you wait Sir.
Pray let's meet oftner Gentlemen,
I would not lose ye.
O sweet Sir.
Do you think I would,
Such noted men as you?
We are your Servants. 
That thing they would keep in everlasting nonage,
My Brother for his own ends has thrust on
Upon my Mistress, it is true, he shall be rich
If ever he can get that Rogue his Uncle
To let him be of years to come to inherit it,
Now what the maine drift is—
Say ye so? no more words,
Isle keep him company till he be of years,
Though it be a hundred years, but isle discover it;
And ten to one isle cross it too.
You are honest,
And I shall study still your love: farewell Sir,
For these few hours I must desire your pardon,
I have business of importance: once a day
At least I hope you'll see me: I must see you else:
So, once more ye are welcome.
All my thanks Sir,
And when I leave to love you, life go from me. 
WHy Sir, the Kingdoms his, and no man now
Can come to Corinth, or from Corinth go
Without his Licence; he puts up the tithes
Of every Office through Achaia;
From Courtier to the Carter hold of him:
Our Lands, our Liberties, nay very lives
Are shut up in his Closet, and let loose
But at his pleasure; Books, and all discourse
Have now no Patron, nor direction.
But glorified Euphanes: our Cups are guilty
That quench our thirsts, if not unto his health:
Oh, I could eat my heart, and fling away
My very soul for anguish: gods, nor men
Should tolerate such disproportion.
And yet is he beloved: whether't be virtue,
Or seeming virtue which he makes the cloak
To his ambition.
Be it which it will:
Your Highness is to tame, your eyes too filmed
To see this, and sit still: the Lion should not
Tremble to hear the bellowing of the Bull;
Nature excuse me, though he be my Brother,
You are my Countries Father, therefore mine:
One parallel line of Love I bend on him,
All lines of love and duty meet in you
As in their Center: therefore hear, and weigh
What I shall speak: You know the Queen your Mother
Did from a private state your Father raise,
So all your Royalty you hold from her;
She is older then she was, therefore more doting,
And what know we but blindness of her love
(That hath from underneath the foot of fortune
Set, even Euphanes foot, on fortunes head)
Will take him by the hand, and cry, Leap now
Into my bed; it is but a trick of age;
Nothing impossible.
What do you infer on this?
Your pardon Sir:
With reverence to the Queen; yet why should I
Fear to speak plain what points to your good?
A Good old Widow is a hungry thing,
(I speak of other Widows, not of Queens.)
Speak to thy purpose.
I approach it: Sir,
Should young Euphanes clasp the Kingdom thus,
And please the good old Lady some one night;
What might not she be wrought to put on you,
Quite to supplant your birth? neither is she
Past children, as I take it.
Crates, Thou shake me;
Thou, that dost hate thy Brother for my love,
In my love find one; henceforth be my brother:
This Giant I will fell beneath the earth;
I will shine out, and melt his artful wings:
Euphanes, from my mothers sea of favours
Spreads like a River, and runs calmly on,
Secure yet from my storms; like a young pine
He grows up planted under a fair Oak,
Whose strong large branches yet do's shelter him,
And every Traveller admires his beauty;
But like a wind, isle work into his crancks,
Trouble his stream, and drown all Vessels that
Ride on his Greatness: under my mothers arms,
Like to a stealing tempest will I search,
And rend his root from her protection.
I, now Theanor speaks like Prince Theanor.
But how shall we provoke him to our snares?
He has a temper malice cannot move
To exceed the bounds of judgement; he is so wise,
That we can pick no cause to affront him.
No?
What better then his crossing your intent?
The suit I had to ye? Conons forfeit state
(Before he travelled) for a Riot, he
Hath from your Mother got restored to him:
Durst he? What is this Conon?
One that hath,
As people say, in foreign pleasured him.
But now no more;
They have brought the Travellors I told you of,
That's the sweet youth, that is my Brothers Rival,
That curls his head, for he has little hair,
And paints his visor, for it is no face,
That so desires to follow you, my Lord:
Show 'em some countenance, and it will beget
Our sport at least.
What villainous Crab-tree legs he makes?
His shins are full of true-love knots.
His legs were ever villainous, since I knew him.
Faith his Uncles shanks are somewhat the better.
But is it possible he should believe he is not of age?
He is 50, man, in's Jubilee I warrant: s'light, he
Looks older then a great, the very stamp on's face is why
Worn out with handling.
Why I tell you all men believe it when they hear him speak,
He utters such single matter in so infantly a voice.
He looks as like a fellow that I have seen accommodate
Gentlemen with Tobacco in our Theaters.
Most illustrious Prince.
A pox on him, he is guelt, how he trebles?
I am a Gentleman a both sides.
He means (so't please your highness) both by Fa∣there &amp; Mother.
Thou a Gentleman? thou an Ass.
He is ne'er the farther from being a Gentle. I assure you.
May it please your Grace, I am another.
He is another Ass he says, I believe him.
We be three, Heroical Prince.
Nay then we must have the Picture of 'em, and the
Word Nos sumus.
That have travailed all parts of the Globe together.
For my part, I have seen the vicissitude of fortune before.
Peace Ʋncle, for though you speak a little better then I—
It is a very little, in truth.
Yet we must both give place, as they say, to the best Speaker
The Tutor.
Yet since it hath pleased your radiance to decline so low, as on us,
Poor and unworthy dunghills.—
What a stinking knaves this?
Our Peregrination was ne'er so felicitated, as since we entered the line of your gracious favour, under whose bea-my aspect, and by which infallible Mathematical com∣pass, may we but hereafter presume to sail, our industries have reached their desired termination and period; and we shall voluntarily sacrifice our lives to your resplendent eyes, both the Altars and fires of our devoted offerings.
Oh divine Tutor!
Can you hold Sir?
He he's spoken this very speech to some Whore in Corinth.
A plague on him for a sustain Dictionary; on my conscience this is the Ʋlissean Travellor that sent home his Image riding upon Elephants to the great Magoll.
The same: his wit is so huge, nought but an Eel∣phoned could carry him.
So heavy you mean.
These three, are even the finest one fool tripartite, that was ere discovered.
Or a Treatise of famine divided into three branches.
The Prince speaks.
I thank ye for your loves; but as I told you,
I have so little means, to do for those
Few followers I have already, that
I would have none shipwreck themselves, and fortune,
Upon my barren shelf: Sue to Euphanes.
For he is Prince, and Queen, I would have no man
Curse me in his old age.
Alas Sir, they desire to follow you
But a far off, the farther off the better.
I Sir, and't be seven mile off, so we may but follow you, only to countenance us in the confronts and af∣fronts, which (according to your Highness will) we mean on all occasions to put upon the Lord Eu∣phones.
He shall not want gibing nor jeering, I warrant him; if he do, i'll forswear wit.
It has forsworn thee, 'ile swear, it is the ancient enemy to thy house.
Well, be it so; I here receive ye, for my followers a great way off.
Seven miles, my Lord, no further.
By what time, Sir, (by this measure) may I come to follow him in his Chamber?
Why when his Chamber, Sir, is seven miles long.
Make way there, for my Lord Euphanes.
Look Sir, Jove appears,
The Peacock of our State, that spreads a train
Brighter then Iris blushes after rain.
You need not thank me Conon, in your love
You Antedated what I can do for you,
And I in gratitude was bound to this,
And am to much more: and what ere he be
Can with unthankfulnesse assoile me, let him
Dig out mine eyes, and sing my name in verse▪
In Balland verse at every drinking-house,
And no man be so charitable to lend me
A Dog to guide my steps.
Hail to Euphanes.
Mighty Euphanes.
The great Prince Euphanes.
Key of the Court, and Jewel of the Queen.
Sol in our Firmament.
Pearl in the States eye.
Being a black man.
Mistress of the Land.
Our humble, humble poor Petitions are,
That we may hold our places.
May we?
Yes; be you malicious knaves still: and you fools.
This is the Princes, and your Brothers spite.
I know it, but will not know it it.
Yonder they are,
Who's fine childe's this?
Sir.
Uncle, le' be,
Let him alone, he is a mighty Prince.
I ask your Highness pardon: I protest
By Jupiter I saw you not.
Humh, it may be so,
You have raised such mountains twixt your eyes and me,
That I am hidden quite: what do ye mean Sir?
You much forget your self.
I should much more,
Not to remember my due duty to your Grace;
I know not wherein I have so transgressed
My service to your Highness, to deserve
This rigour and contempt, not from you only
But from your followers, with the best of whom
I was an equal in my lowest ebb:
Beseech you Sir, respect me as a Gentleman,
I will be never more in heart to you:
Five fair Descents I can derive my self,
From Fathers worthy both in Arts and Arms.
I know your goodness companies your greatness
But that you are perverted: Royal Sir,
I am your humblest subject, use your pleasure,
But do not give protection to the wrongs
Of these subordinate Slaves, whom I could crush
By that great destined favour, which my Mistress
And your majestic Mother deigns to me,
But in respect of you: I know lean envy
Waits ever on the steps of virtue advanced:
But why your Mothers grace gets me disgrace,
Or renders me a slave to bear these wrongs
I do not know.
Oh Mediocrity,
Thou prizelesse jewel, only mean men have
But cannot value; like the precious Jem,
Found in the Mukhill by the ignorant Cock.
Your creamy words but cozen: how durst you
Intercept me so lately to my Mother?
And what I meant your Brother, you obtained
Unto the forfeiture again.
Your answer to that my Lord, my Brother.
May I perish
If ere I heard you intended such a Suit,
Though it would have stuck an ignominious brand
Upon your Highness, to have given your servant
A Gentleman's whole state of worth and quality,
Confiscate only for a youthful brawl.
Your rudiments are too saucy: teach your Page.
I, so are all things but your flatterers.
Hold you your prating.
You know where you are, you fleeten face.
Yet Sir to appease and satisfy your anger,
Take what you please from me, and give it him
In lieu of this: you shall not take it neither,
I freely will impart it, half my state,
Which Brother if you please—
Isle starve in Chains first,
Eat my own arms.
Oh that you saw your self:
You ne'er made me such offer in my poorness,
And because (to do you ease) I sought not to you
You thus malign me; yet your nature must not
Corrupt mine, nor your rude examples lead me:
If mine can mend you, I shall joy; you know
I fear you not: you have seen me proved a man
In every way of fortune, it is my comfort
I know no more such Brothers in the world
As Crates is.
Nor I such as Euphanes:
The temper of an Angel reigns in thee.
Your Royal Mother Sir, (I had forgot)
Entreats your presence.
You have done her errand,
I may do yours. 
Let it be truth my Lord.
Crates, isle question you for this.
Pish, your worst. 
Away you hounds after your sent.
Come, we will scorn to talk to 'm: now they are gone,
We will away too. 
Why bear you this my Lord?
To show the passive fortitude the best;
Virtues a solid Rock, whereat being aimed
The keenest darts of envy, yet unhurt
Her Marble Heroes stand, built of such Bases,
Whilst they recoil, and wound the Shooters faces.
My Lord, the Queen.
Gentle Euphanes, how,
How dost thou honest Lord? oh how I joy
To see what I have made, like a choice Workman,
That having framed a Master-peece, doth reap
An universal commendations.
Princes are Gods in this. Isle build thee yet,
(The good foundation so pleases me)
A story or two higher; let Dogs bark,
They are fools that hold them dignified by blood,
They should be only made great that are good.
Oraculous Madam.
Sir, I was thinking
If I should marry thee, what merry tales
Our neighbour Islands would make of us;
But let that pass, you have a Mistress
That would forbid our Banes: troth I have wished
A thousand times that I had been a man,
Then I might sit a day with thee alone,
And talk,
But as I am I must not; there's no skill
In being good, but in not being thought ill.
Sirrah, who's that?
So't please your Majesty
Conon, the friend I sued for.
It is dispatched.
Gracious Madam,
I owe the gods and you my life.
I thank you,
I thank you heartily; and I do think you
A very honest man, he says you are:
But now isle chide thee; what's the cause my Son,
For my eye's every where, and I have heard,
So insolently do's thee Contumelies
Past sufferance (I am told) yet you complain not,
As if my justice were so partial
As not to right the meanest: credit me,
Isle call him to a strict account, and fright
By his example, all that dare curb me
In any thing that's just: I sent you for him.
Humbly he did return, he would wait on you:
But let me implore your Majesty, not to give
His Highness any check, for worthless me;
They are Court canckers, and not Counsellors
That thus inform you: they do but hate the Prince,
And would subvert me: I should curse my fortune
Even at the highest, to be made the gin
To unscrew a Mothers love unto her Son:
Better had my pale flame in humble shades
Been spent unseen, then to be raised thus high,
Now to be thought a meteor to the State,
Portending ruin and contagion:
Beseech you then rest satisfied, the Prince
Is a most noble natured Gentleman,
And never did to me but what I took
As favours from him, my blown billows must not
Strive against my shore, that should confine me; nor
Justly with Rocks to break themselves to pieces.
Well, you're the composition of a god:
My Lion, Lamb, my Eaglet, and my Dove,
Whose soul runs clearer then Dianas Fount,
Nature picked several flowers from her choice banks
And bound 'em up in thee, sending thee forth
A Posy for the bosom of a Queen.
The Prince attends you.
Farewell my good Lord,
My honest man; Stay, hast no other suit?
I prithee tell me; Sirrah, thine eye speaks
As if thou had: out with it modest fool.
With favour Madam, I would crave your leave
To Marry, where I am bound in gratitude,
The immediate means she was to all my being:
Nor do I think your wisdom sacred Queen
Fetters in favours, taking from me so
The liberty that meanest men enjoy.
To marry? you are a fool: thou'st angered me:
Leave me, isle think on it: 
Only to try thee this, for though I love thee,
I can subdue my self: but she that can
Enjoy thee, doth enjoy more then a man.
Nay rise without a blessing, or kneel still:
What's Sir the reason you oppose me thus,
And seek to darken what I would have shine?
Eclipse a fire much brighter then thy self,
Making your Mother not a competent Judge
Of her own actions?
Gracious Madam, I
I have done no more then what in royalty
(And to preserve your fame) was fit to do:
Heard you the peoples talk of you, and him
You favour so, his greatness, and your love,
The pity given to me, you would excuse me,
They prate as if he did dishonour you:
And what know I, but his own lavish tongue
Has uttered some such speeches; he is called
The King of Corinth.
They are traitors all:
I wear a Crystal casement before my heart,
Through which each honest eye may look in to it:
Let it be prospect unto all the world,
I care not this.
This must not be my way;
Your pardon gracious Madam: these incitements
Made me not show so clear a countenance
Upon the Lord Euphanes as I would:
Which since your Majesty affects so grievously
Isle clear the black cloud of it, and henceforth
Vow on this knee all love and grace to him.
Rise with my blessing, and to prove this true,
Bear him from me this Cabinet of Jewels
In your own person, tell him, for his marrying
He may dispose him how, and when he please. 
I shall discharge my duty and your will.
Crates?
I have heard all my Lord, how luckily
Fate pops her very spindle in our hands:
This marriage with Beliza you shall cross,
Then have I one attempt for Lamprias more
Upon this Phaeton: whore's Merione's Ring,
That in the Rape you took from her?
It is here.
In and effect our purpose: you my Lord
Shall disobey your Mothers charge, and send
This Cabinet by some servant of her own,
That what succeeds may have no reference
Unto your Highness.
On, my engine on.
Now, if we be not struck by Heavens own hand,
We will ruin him, and on his ruins stand. 
These heavy Airs feed sorrow in her Lady,
And nourish it too strongly; like a Mother
That spoils her Child with giving on it the will.
Some lighter note. 
How like a hill of Snow she sits, and melts
Before the unchaste fire of others lust?
What heart can see her passion and not break?
Take comfort gentle Madam; you know well
Even actual sins committed without will,
Are neither sins nor shame, much more compelled;
Your Honour's no whit less, your Chastity
No whit impaired, for fair Marion
Is more a Virgin yet then all her Sex:
Alas, it is done; why burn these Tapers now?
Wicked and frantic Creatures joy in night.
Imagine fair Marion had dreamed
She had been ravished, would she si• thus then
Excruciate?
Oh.
Fie, fie, how fond is this?
What reason for this surfeit of remorse?
How many that have done ill, and proceed,
Women that take degrees in wantonness,
Commence, and rise in rudiments of Lust,
That feel no scruple of this tenderness?
Pish.
Nor are you matches in mishap, even I
Doe bear an equal part of misery;
That love, beloved, a man, the Crown of men,
Whom I have friended, and how raised it is better
That all doe know and speak it then my self:
When he sailed low I might have made him mine,
Now at his full gale, it is questionable
If ever I o're-take him.
Wherefore sits
My Phebe shadowed in a sable could?
Those pearly drops which thou lets't fall like beads,
Numbering on them thy vestal Orisons
Alas are spent in vain: I love thee still,
In midst of all these showers thou sweetlier sent,
Like a green Meadow on an April day,
In which the Sun and West-wind play together,
Striving to catch and drink the balmy drops.
The Lord Euphanes Madam. 
Poor Marion,
She loathes the light, and men. 
The virtuous gods preserve my Mistress.
O my most honoured Lord, those times are changed.
Let times and men change, could Heaven change, Euphanes
Should never change, to be devoted ever
To fair Beliza, should my load of honours,
Or any Grace which you were Author of
Detract mine honour, and diminish Grace?
The gods forbid: you here behold your Servant,
Your Creature, gentle Lady, whose sound sleeps
You purchased for him: whose food you paid for,
Whose garments were your charge, whose first preferment
You founded: then, what since the gracious Queen
Hath, or can rear, is upon your free Land,
And you are Mistress of.
Mock me not gentle Lord,
You shine now in too high a sphere for me,
We are Planets now disjoined for ever: yet
Poor superstitious innocent that I am,
Give leave that I may lift my hands, and love
Not in Idolatry, but perfect zeal:
For credit me, I repent nothing I have done,
But were it to begin would do the same.
There are two Seas in Corinth, and two Queens,
And but there, not two such in the spacious Universe;
I came to tender you the man you have made,
And like a thankful stream to retribute
All you my Ocean have enriched me with.
You told me once you'd marry me.
Another mock? you were wont to play faireplay,
You scorn poor helps; he that is sure to win,
May slight mean harts, whose hand commands the Queen
Let me be held the Knave through all the Stock
When I doe slight my Mistress; you know well
The gracious inclination of the Queen,
Who sent me leave this morning to proceed
To marry, as I saw convenience,
And a great gift of Jewels: Three days hence
The general sacrifice is done to Vesta,
And can you by then be accommodated
Your servant shall wait on you to the Temple.
Till now
I never felt a real joy indeed.
Here then I seal my duty, here my love,
Till which vouchsafe to wear this Ring, dear Mistress;
It was the Queens Token, and shall celebrate
Our Nuptials.
Honour still raise, and preserve
My honoured Lord, as he preserves all honour. 
Why shift you places thus Marion,
And will not lend a word? Coldest thou so soon
Leave sorrow as the place, how blessed were I,
But twill not be; grief is an impudent guest,
A follower every where, a hanger on,
That words nor blows can drive away.
Dear Sister.
Who can be sad? out with these Tragic Lights,
And let day repossess her natural hours:
Tear down these blacks, cast open the Casements wide,
That we may jocondly behold the Sun.
I did partake with sad Marion
In all her mourning: let her now rejoice
With glad Beliza, for Euphanes is
As full of love, full of humility
As when he wanted.
Oh — that.
Help, she faints:
Her grief has broke her heart.
No— that — that.
Mistress, what point you at?
Her lamps are out, yet still she extends her hand
As if she saw something antipathous
Unto her virtuous life.
Still, still she points,
And her lips move, but no articulate sound
Breathes from 'em: Sister, speak, what moves you thus?
Her spirits return.
Oh, hide that fatal Ring,
Where had it you Beliza?
What hid fate
Depends on it? Euphanes gave it me
As holy pledge of future Marriage.
Then is Euphanes the foul Ravisher?
Let me speak this and dye. That dismal night
Which sealed my shame upon me, was that Ring,
The partner of my robed virginity.
Euphanes?
Strange.
Impossible.
Impossible. to have redress on him,
Chief servant to the Queen—ha! I have read
Somewhere I am sure, of such an injury
Done to a Lady: and how she durst dye. 
Oh follow her Beliza
To assure her,
The unlikelihood of this
Love hides all sins. 
What's to be done Leonidas?
Why this:
Amazement takes up all my faculties;
The plagues of gods and men will muster all
To avenge this tyranny. Oh frontlesse man,
To dare doe ill, and hope to bear it thus:
First let's implore, then cure.
Who, who can trust
The gentle looks and words of two-fac'd man?
Like Corinths double torrent, you and I
Will rush upon the Land; nor shall the Queen
Defend this Villain in his villainy:
Lusts violent flames can never be withstood
Nor quenched, but with as violent streams of blood.
Thinks he to carry her and live?
It seems so,
And she will carry him the story says.
Well, hum—
Have I for this thou fair but falsest fair
Stretched this same simple leg over the Sea?
What though my bashfulness, and tender years,
Durst ne'er reveal my affection to thy teeth?
Deep love ne'er tatles, and (say they) loves bit
The deeper dipped, the sweeter still is it.
Oh, see the power of Love: he speaks in rhyme.
Oh, love will make a Dog howl in rime:
Of all the Lovers yet I have heard or read
This is the strangest: but his Guardian,
And you his Tutor should inform him better,
Thinks he, that Love is answered by instinct?
He should make means▪
For certain Sir his bashfulness undo's him,
For from his Cradle h'had a shameful face.
Thus walks he night and day▪ eats not a bit,
Nor sleeps one jot, butt's grown so humorous;
Drinks Ale, and takes Tobacco as you see;
Weare's a Stiletto at his Codpeece close,
Stabs on the least occasion: strokes his beard,
Which now he puts in the posture of a T.
The Roman T. your T. beard is the fashion,
And twofold doth express the enamoured Courtier,
As full as your fork-carving Travellour.
Oh, black clouds of discontent envelop me,
Garters fly off: go Hatband, bind the brows
Of some dull Citizen that fears to ache:
And Leg appear now in simplicity
Without the trappings of a Courtier:
Burst Buttons, burst, your Bachelor is wormed.
A worm-eaten Bachelor you are indeed.
And Devil melancholy possesses me now.
Cross him not in this fit I advise you Sir.
Dye crimson Rose, that did adorn these cheeks, scabby.
For ytch of love is now broke forth on me.
Poor Boy, it is true: his wrists and hands are scabby.
Burn eyes out in your sockets, sink and stink:
Teeth I will pick ye to the very bones,
Hang hair like Hemp, or like the Isling Curs,
For never Powder, nor the Crisping-iron
Shall touch these dangling locks—oh—Ruby lips,
Love hath to you been like Wine-vinegar,
Now you look wan and pale, lips, ghosts ye are,
And my disgrace sharper than Mustard-seed.
How like a Chandler he do's vent his passions,
Resume teneatis?
Well sung the Poet,
Love is a golden bubo, full of Dreams:
That ripened breaks, and fills us with extremes.
A gold bubble, pupil, Oh gross solecism
To chaster ears, that understand the Latin.
I will not be corrected now:
I am in love, revenge is now the Cud
That I do chaw: Isle challenge him.
I marry Sir.
Your Honour bids you Nephew, on, and prosper.
But none will bear it from me, times are dangerous.
Carry it your self man.
Tutor, your counsel: Isle do nothing Sir
Without him.
This may rid thee, (valiant Cousin)
Whom I have kept this forty year my Ward:
Fine would I have his state, and now of late
He did enquire at Ephesus for his age,
But the Church Book being burnt with Deans Temple
He lost his aim: I have tried to famish him,
Marry he'll live of stones: and then for Poisons,
He is an Antidote against all of 'em;
He sprung from Mithridates; he is so dry and hot,
He will eat Spiders faster then a Monkey:
His Maw (unhurt) keeps Quicksilver like a bladder,
The largest dosse of Camphor, Opium,
Harms not his brain; I think his Skul's as empty
As a sucked Egg; Vitriol, and Oil of Tartar
He will eat tosts of: Henbane I am sure
And Hemblock I have made his Pot-hearbs often.
If he refuse you, yours is then the honour:
If he accept, he being so great, you may
Crave both to choose the Weapon, time, and place,
Which may be ten years hence, and Calicut,
Or underneath the lyne to avoid advantage.
I am resolved.
By your favour Pupil,
Whence shall this challenge rise? for you must ground it
On some such fundamental base, or matter
As now the Gentry set their lives upon.
Did you ere cheat him at some Ordinary,
And durst he say so, and be angry? if thus,
Then you must challenge him hath he called your whore,
Whore; though she be (beside yours) twenty men's?
Your honour, reputation is touched then,
And you must challenge him: Has he denied
On thirty damn me's to accommodate money,
Though he have broke threescore before to you?
Here you must challenge him: Durst he ever shun
To drink two pots of Ale with ye? or to wench,
Though weighty business otherwise importuned?
He is a proud Lord,
And you may challenge him: Has he familiarly
Disliked your yellow Starch or said your Doublet
Was not exactly frenchifi'd? or that, that report
In fair terms was untrue? or drawn your Sword,
Cried it was ill mounted? Has he given the lye
In circle, or oblique, or semy-circle,
Or direct parallel? you must challenge him.
He never gave my direct apparel the lye in's life.
But for the crown of all, Has he refused
To pledge your Mistress health though he were sick?
And craved your pardon? you must challenge him,
There's no avoiding: one or both must drop.
Exquisi•e Tutor.
Crates, I have sought you long, what make you here
Fooling with these three farthings, while the Town
Is all in unproare, and the Prince our Master
(Ceased by Leonidas, and Agenor) carried
And Prisoner kept in the Castle, flanckes
The west part of the City, where they vow
To hold him, till your Brother, Lord Euphanes
Be rendered to 'em, with his life to satisfy
The Rape, by him suspected to Marion?
The Queen refuses to deliver him,
Pawning her knowledge for his innocence,
And dares 'em do their worst on Prince Theanor,
The whole State's in combustion.
Fatal Ring.
What will become of us?
And she hath given Commission to Euphanes
And Conon (who have levied men already)
With violence to surprise the Tower, and take 'em.
What will you doe?
Along with ye, and prevent
A further mischief: Gentlemen, our intents
We must defer: you are the Princes followers.
Will ye walk with us?
You shall pardon us.
We are his followers afar off you know.
And are contented to continue so.
Sir Boy.
Sir Fool? a Challenge to my Lord?
How dare thou, or thy ambs—ace here think of him,
Ye Crow-pick'd heads, which your thin shoulders bear
As doe the poles on Corinth Bridge the Traitors:
Why you three Ninc-pins, you talk of my Lord,
And Challenges? you shall not need: come draw,
His Page is able to swindge three such whelps:
Uncle, why stand ye off: long-man advance.
S'light, what have we done Tutor?
He is a Boy,
And we may run away with honour.
That ye shall not,
And being a Boy I am fitter to encounter
A Child in Law as you are, under twenty:
Thou Sot, thou three-score Sot, and that's a Child
Again I grant you.
Nephew, here's an age:
Boys are turned men, and men are Children.
Away you Peasants with your bought Gentry;
Are not you he, when your fellow Passengers,
Your last transportment being assailed by a Galley
Hid your self in the Cabin: and the Fight done
Peeped above Hatches, and cried, Have we taken,
Or are we tan? Come, I doe want a slipper,
But this shall serve: Swear all as I would have you,
Or I will call some dozen brother Pages,
(They are not far off I am sure) and we will blancket
You until you peace again.
Nay, we will swear Sir.
It is your best course:
First, you shall swear never to name my Lord,
Or hear him named hereafter, but bare-headed.
Next, to begin his health in every place,
And never to refuse to pledge it, though
You surfeit to the death. Lastly, to hold
The poorest, littlest Page in reverence;
To think him more valiant, and a better Gentleman
Then you three stamped together: and to give him
Wine and Tobacco wheresoever you meet,
And the best meat if he can stay.
We swear it loyally.
Then I dismiss you
True Leigmen to the Pantaffle:
I had more Articles, but I have business
And cannot stay now: so adieu dear Monsieur,
Tres nobles &amp; tres puissant.
Adieu Monsieur.
A vostre service &amp; commandment.
I told you Pupil, you'd repent this foolery.
Who, I repent? you are mistaken Tutor,
I ne'er repented any thing yet in my life,
And scorn to begin now: Come, let's be melancholy.
It were better treat with 'em.
I will no Treaties
With a League-breaker and a Rebel; shall I
Article with a Traitor? be compelled
To yield an innocent unto their fury
Whom I have proved so to you?
Gracious Queen,
Though your own god-like disposition
Would succour virtue, and protect the right,
Yet for the public good, for the dear safety
Of your most Royal only Son, consent
To give me up the sacrifice to their malice:
My life is aimed at, and it were better far
The blood of twenty thousand such as I
Purpled our Seas, then that your Princely Son
Should be endangered.
Still well said honest Fool,
Were their demand but one hair from thy head,
By all the gods il'd scorn 'em: were they here,
The Majesty that dwells upon this brow
Should strike 'em on their knees: As for my Son,
Let 'em no more dare then they'll answer, I
An equal Mother to my Country, am,
And every virtuous Son of it is son
Unto my bosom, tender as mine own.
Oh, you are heavenly Madam, and the gods
Can suffer nothing pass to injure you:
The life that Conon promised, he stands now
Ready to pay with joy.
Farewell both,
Success attend you: you have Soldiers been,
Tam Mart quam Mercurio: if you bring not peace
Bring me their heads.
I will put fair for one. 
Double the Guard upon her Highness Person;
Conon, you must perform a friendly part,
Which I shall counsel you.
I am your Servant 
Make good that Fortification, and the Watch
Keep still upon the Battlements: Royal Sir,
Weigh but our injuries, we have told you fully
The manner and the matter hales us thus;
Nor shall this upstart Mushrum bred i'ch night,
Sit brooding underneath your Mothers wings
His damned impieties.
For your self, brave Prince,
Fear nothing that this face of Arms presents:
We ask the Ravisher, and have no means
To win him from your most indulgent Mother
But by this practice.
Stout Leonidas,
Princely Agenor, your wrongs cry so loud,
That who so would condemn you is not heard:
I blame you not, who but Euphanes durst
Make Stories like to this? My wrong's as strong
Ask my revengeful arm to strengthen yours:
As for my fear, know you, and Greece throughout,
Our Mother was a Spartan Princess borne,
That never taught me to spell such a word.
Sir, you doe tempt your life.
Conon, no more.
Doe thus as thou would save it. 
What Trumpet's this?
Beneath I doe perceive
Two armed men, single, that give us summons
As they would treat.
Let us descend.
My Lord,
I would you would excuse me, and proceed
According to the Queens directions.
Friend,
As thou would wear that title after death
Perform my charge: no Soldier on his life
Approach us nearer.
Safety to both the Princes, loyalty
To you Lord General, the Queen, your Mistress
As well as ours, though not to fear, to cut
Civil dissention from her Land, and save
Much guiltless blood, that uproar ever thirsts,
And for the safe-guard of her Son, by me
(As you demand) hath sent the Lord Euphanes
To plead his own cause, or to suffer death
As you shall find him worthy; so delivering
The Prince back, I shall leave him to your Guard.
The Queen is good and gracious: kiss her hand.
And seal our duties: Sir, depart in peace.
Oh Sir, you now perceive, when in the scales
Nature, and fond affection weigh together,
One poises like a feather, and you know my Lords
What's to be done.
Your Highness is unarmed,
Please you to use mine, and to lead the Army
Back to your Mother: Conon, march you with 'em.
I will my Lord: But not so far as not
To bring you help if danger look upon you. 
Why doe you look so strangely, fearfully,
Or stay your deathful hand, be not so wise
To stop your rage: look how unmoov'dly, here
I give my self my Countries sacrifice,
An innocent sacrifice: Truth laughs at death,
And terrifies the killer more then killed;
Integrity thus armelesse seeks her foes,
And never needs the Target, nor the Sword,
Bow, nor envenomed shafts.
We are amazed,
Not at your eloquence, but impudence,
That dare thus front us.
Kill him, who knows not
The iron forehead that bold mischief wears.
Forbear a while Agenor, I doe tremble,
And something sits like virtue in his face,
Which the gods keep.
Agenor, strike Leonidas
You that have purchased fame on certain grounds,
Loose it on supposition? smear your hands
In guiltless blood, laugh at my Martyrdom:
But yet remember, when Posterity
Shall read your Volumes filled with virtuous acts,
And shall arrive at this black bloody leaf,
Noting your foolish barbarism, and my wrong,
(As time shall make it plain) what follows this
Disciphering any noble deed of yours
Shall be quite lost, for men will read no more.
Why? dare you say you are innocent?
By all the gods, as they
Of this foul crime, why Gent. pry clean through my life,
Then weigh these circumstances: think you that he
Which made day night, and men to furies turned,
Durst not trust silence, visors, nor her sense
That suffered; but with Charms and Potions
Cast her asleep, (for all this I have enquired)
Acted the Fable of Proserpines Rape,
The place (by all description) like to Hell:
And all to perpetrate unknown his Lust,
Would fondly in his Person bring a Ring,
And give it a betrothed Wife, in the same house
Where the poor injured Lady lived, and groaned.
Hell gives us Art to reach the depth of sin,
But leaves us wretched Fools, when we are in.
Had it given me that Art, and left me so,
I would not thus into the Lyons jaws
Have thrust my self (defenceless) for your good,
The Princes safety, or the Common-weales:
You know the Queen denied me, and sent us
Commanders to surprise you, and to race
This Tower down, we had power enough to doe it,
Or starve you, as you saw, and not to tender
My Person to your wrath, which I have done,
Knowing my heart as pure as infants sleep.
What think you Sir?
No harm I am sure: I weep.
The gods are just, and mighty: but to give you
Further assurance, and to make your selves
Judges, and witnesses of my innocence,
Let me demand this question: On what night
Was this foul deed committed?
On the Eave
Before our Marriage meant.
Leonidas,
(Your rage being off, that still drowns memory)
Where was your self and I that very night,
And what our conference?
By the gods it is true:
Both in her Highness Chamber conferring
Even of this Match until an hour of day,
And then came I to call you: we are shamed.
Utterly lost, and shamed.
Neither, be cheered,
He that could find this out can pardon it,
And know this Ring was sent me from the Queen,
How she came by it, yet is not exquir'd,
Deeper occurrents hang on it: and pray Heaven
That my suspicions prove as false as yours,
Which (for the world) till I have greater proof
I dare not utter what, nor whom they touch;
Only this build upon, with ail my nerves
Isle labour with ye, till time waken truth.
There are our swords Sir, turn the points on us,
Punish Rebellion, and revenge your wrong.
Sir, my revenge shall be to make your peace,
Neither was this Rebellion, but rash love.
How's this? unarmed left, now found doubly armed?
And those that would have slain him at his feet?
Oh Truth, thou art a mighty Conquers:
The Queen (my Lord) perplexed in care of you,
That cross to her command hazard your self
In person, here is come into the Field,
And like a Leader, marches in the head
Of all her Troops, vows that she will demolish
Each stone of this proud Tower be you not safe:
She chafes like storms in Groves, now sighs, now weeps,
And both sometimes, like Rain and Wind comixed,
Abjures her Son for ever, less himself
Do fetch you off in person, that did give
Your self to save him of your own free will,
And swears he must not, nor is sit to live.
Oh she's a Mistress for the gods.
And thou
A godlike servant fit for her.
Wide Greece
May boast because she cannot boast thy like.
Thus Conon tell her Highness.
My joy flies.
Let's toward her march: sterne Drum speak gentle peace.
We are prisoners, lead us, ne'er was known
A president like this: one unarmed man
(Suspected) to captive with golden words
(Truth being his shield) so many armed with swords. 
We are not lucky Crates, this great torrent
Bears all before him.
Such an age as this
Shall ne'er be seen again: virtue grows fat,
And villainy pines; the Furies are asleep,
Mischief against goodness aimed is like a stone,
Unnaturally forced up an imminent hill,
Whose weight falls on our heads and buries us,
We spring our selves, we sink in our own bogs.
What's to be done?
Repent and grow good.
Pish,
It is not the fashion (fool) till we grow old:
The peoples love to him now scares me more
Then my fond Mothers: both which like two floods
Bearing Euphanes up; will o're-flow me,
And he is worthy, would he were in Heaven,
Be that hereafer: Crates help me now,
And henceforth be at ease.
Your will my Lord?
Beliza is to marry him forth-with,
I long to have the first touch of her too,
That will a little quiet me.
Fie Sir,
You'll be the tyrant to virginity;
To fall but once is manly, to persevere
Beastly, and desperate.
Cross me not but do it:
Are not the means, the place, the instruments
The very same? I must expect you suddenly. 
I must obey you.
Who is in evil once a companion
Can hardly shake him off, but must run on.
Here I appointed Conon to attend
Him, and his sword: he promised to come single
To avoid prevention: he is a man on's word.
You are well met Crates.
If we part so Conon.
Come, we must doe these mutual offices,
We must be our own seconds, our own Surgeons,
And fairly fight, like men, not on advantage.
You have an honest bosom.
Yours seems so.
Let's pair our swords: you are a just Gentleman.
You might be so: now shake hands if you please,
Though't be the cudgel fashion, it is friendly one.
So, stand off.
That's my que to beckon 'em. 
Crates, to expostulate your wrongs to me
Were to doubt of 'em, or wish your excuse
In words, and so return like maiden Knights:
Yet freely thus much I profess, your spleen
And rugged carriage toward your honoured Brother
Hath much more stirred me up, then mine own cause,
For I did ne'er affect these bloody men,
But hold 'em fitter be made public Hangmen,
Or Butchers called, then valiant Gentlemen:
It is true stamped valour do's upon just grounds,
Yet for whom justlier should I expose my life
Than him, unto whose virtue I owe all.
Conon, you think by this great deed of yours
To insinuate your self a lodging nearer
Unto my Brothers heart: such men as you
Live on their undertakings for their Lords,
And more disable them by answering for 'em
Then if they sate still, make 'em but their Whores,
For which end Gallants now adays do fight:
But here we come not to upbraid; what men
Seem, the rash world will judge; but what they are
Heaven knows: and this—Horses, we are descried,
One stroke for fear of laughter.
Half a score.
Hold, hold: on your allegiance hold.
He that strikks next—
Falls like a Traitor on our swords.
Oh Heaven, my Brother bleeds: Conon, thou art
A villain, an unthankful man, and shalt
Pay me thy blood for his, for his is mine:
Thou were my friend, but he is still my Brother;
And though a friend sometimes be nearer said
In some gradation, it can never be
Where that same Brother can be made a friend,
Which dearest Crates thus low I implore;
What in my poverty I would not seek,
Because I would not burden you, now here
In all my height of bliss I beg of you,
Your friendship; my advancement Sir is yours;
I never held it strange, pray use it so:
We are but two, which number Nature framed
In the most useful faculties of man,
To strengthen mutually and relieve each other:
Two eyes, two ears, two arms, two legs and feet,
That where one failed the other might supply;
And I, your other eye, ear, your arm and leg,
Tender my service, help and succour to ye.
Leo, A most divine example.
For dear Brother,
You have been blind, and lame, and deaf to me,
Now be no more so: in humility
I give ye the duty of a younger Brother,
Which take you as a Brother, not a Father,
And then you'll pay a duty back to me.
Till now I have not wept these thirty years.
Discording Brothers are like mutual legs
Supplanting one another: he that seeks
Aid from a stranger and forsakes his Brother,
Do's but like him that madly lops his arm,
And to his body joins a wooden one:
Cuts off his natural leg, and trusts a Crutch,
Plucks out his eye to see with Spectacles.
Most dear Euphanes, in this crimson flood
Wash my unkindness out: you have ore-come me,
Taught me humanity and brotherhood;
Full well knew Nature thou were fitter far
To be a Ruler ore me then a Brother,
Which henceforth be: Jove surely did descend
When thou were gotten in some heavenly shape
And greet my Mother, as the Poets tell
Of other women.
Be this Holy-day.
And noted ever with the whitest stone.
And pardon me my Lord, look you, I bleed
Faster then Crates; what I have done I did
To reconcile your loves, to both a friend,
With my blood cement, never to part or end.
Most worthy Conon.
Happy rise, this day
Contracts more good then a whole age hath done.
Royal Agenor, brave Leonidas,
You are maine causes, and must share the fame.
Which in some part this hour shall requight,
For I have aimed my black shafts at white marks,
And now isle put the clew into your hands
Shall guide ye most perspicuously to the depth
Of this dark Labyrinth, where so long ye were lost
Touching this old Rape, and a new intent,
Wherein your counsel, and your active wit
My dearest Brother will be necessary.
My Prophecy is come, prove my hopes true
Agenor shall have right, and you no wrong,
Time now will pluck her daughter from her Cave:
Let's hence to prevent rumour; my dear Brother,
Natures divided streams the highest shelf
Will over-run at last, and flow to it self. 
I Have won the Lady to it, and that good
Which is intended to her, your faith only
And secrecy must make perfect: Think not Sir,
I speak as doubting it, for I dare hazard
My soul upon the trial.
You may safely,
But are Agenor, and Leonidas ready
To rush upon him in the Act, and seize him
In the height of his security?
At all parts
As you could wish them.
Whore's the Lady?
There
Where you appointed her to stay.
It is wisely ordered.
Last, when you have him sure compel him this way,
For as by accident here isle bring the Queen
To meet you, twill strike greater terror to him,
To be tan unprovided of excuse,
And make more for our purposes. 
Come Neanthes,
Our fems and all are at the stake.
It is fit
That since relying on your skill we venture
So much upon one game, you play with cunning
Or we shall rise such losers: as—
The Prince.
The plot is laid Sir, howsoe're I seemed
A little scrupulous, upon better judgement
I have effected it.
It is the last service
Of this foul kind I will employ you in.
We hope so Sir.
And I will so reward it—
You are bound to that; in every Family
That do's write lustful, your fine Bawd gains more
(For like your Broker, he takes fees on both sides)
Then all the Officers of the house.
For us then
To be a great mans Panders, and live poor,
That were a double fault.
Come, you lose time Sir,
We will be with you instantly: the deed done,
We have a Mask that you expect not.
Thou art ever careful: for Joves Mercury
I would not change thee. 
There's an honour for you.
To be compared with the celestial Pimp,
Joves smock-sworne Squire, Dan Harms.
Isle deserve it,
And Gentlemen be assured, though what we do now
Will to the Prince Theanor look like treason
And base disloyalty, yet the end shall prove,
When he's first taught to know himself, then you,
In what he judged us false we were must true. 
Only make haste (my Lords) in all things else
You are instructed: you may draw your swords
For show if you think good, but on my life
You will find no resistance in his servants,
And he's himself unarmed.
I would he were not,
My just rage should not then be lost.
Good Sir,
Have you a care no injury be done
Unto the Person of the Prince: but Conon,
Have you an eye on both, it is your trust
That I rely on.
Which I will discharge,
Assure your self most faithfully.
For the Lady,
I know your best respect will nor be wanting:
Then to avoid suspicion and discovery,
I hold it requisite, that as soon as ever
The Queen hath seen her, she forsake the place,
And fit her self for that which is projected
For her good, and your honour.
If this prosper,
Believe it you have made a purchase of
My service and my life.
Your love I aim at.
Here I shall find you?
With the Qteene.
Enough Sir. 
The Queen enquires for you my Lord, I have met
A dozen Messengers in search of you.
I knew I should be sought for, as I wished
She's come her self in person.
Are you found Sir?
I wonder where you spend your hours, me thinks
Since I so love your company, and profess
It is the best comfort this life yields me; mine
Should not be tedious to you.
Gracious Madam,
To have the happiness to see and hear you,
Which by your bounty is conferred upon me,
I hold so great a blessing, that my honours
And wealth compared to that are but as Ciphers
To make that number greater: yet your pardon
For borrowing from my duty so much time
As the provision for my sudden Marriage
Exacted from me.
I perceive this Marriage
Will keep you often from me: but isle bear it.
She's a good Lady, and a fair, Euphanes,
Yet by her leave I will share with her in you:
I am pleased that in the night she shall enjoy you,
And that's sufficient for a Wife: the day time
I will divorce you from her.
We will force you if you resist.
What noise is that?
Base Traitors.
It moves this way.
What ere it be isle meet it,
I was not borne to fear: Who's that Beliza?
My worthiest, noblest Mistress. 
Stay her, ha?
All of you look as you were rooted here,
And wanted motion: what new Gorgons head
Have you beheld, that you are all turned Statues?
This is prodigious: he's none a tongue
To speak the cause?
Could every hair great Queen
Upon my head yield an articulate sound,
And all together speak, they could not yet
Express the villainy we have discovered,
And yet, when with a few unwilling words
I have delivered what must needs be known,
You'll say I am too eloquent, and wish
I had been borne without a tongue.
Speak boldly,
For I unmoved with any loss will hear.
Then know, we have found out the Ravisher
Of my poor Sister, and the place, and means
By which the unfortunate though fair Beliza
Hath met a second violence.
This confirms
What but before I doubted, to my ruin
My Lady ravished.
Point me out the villain,
That guilty wretched monster that hath done this,
That I may look on him, and in mine eye
He read his Sentence.
That I truly could
Name any other but the Prince, that heard
You have it all.
Wonder not that I shake,
The miracle is greater that I live,
Having endured the thunder that thy words
Have thrown upon me: dare thou kneel, with hope
Of any favour, but a speedy death,
And that too in the dreadfull'st shape that can
Appear to a despairing leprous soul,
If thou hast any? no, libidinous beast,
Thy Lust hath altered so thy former being,
By Heaven I know thee not.
Although unworthy
Yet still I am your Son.
Thou lie, lie falsely,
My whole life never knew but one chaste bed,
Nor ever desired warmth but from lawful fires,
Can I be then the Mother to a Goat,
Whose lust is more insatiate then the grave,
And like infectious ayre engenders plagues,
To murder all that's chaste, or good in woman?
The Gods I from my youth have served and feared,
Whose holy Temples thou hast made thy Brothels;
Could a Religious Mother then bring forth
So damned an Atheist? read but o'er my life,
My actions, manners, and made perfect in them
But look into the story of thy self
As thou art now, not as thou were Theanor,
And Reason will compel thee to confess,
Thou art a stranger to me.
Note but how heavy
The weight of guilt is: it so low hath sunk him
That he wants power to rise up in defence
Of his bad cause.
Persuade me not Euphanes,
This is no Prince, nor can claim part in me:
My Son was borne a Free-man, this a Slave
To beastly passions, a fugitive,
And run-away from virtue: bring bonds for him.
By all the honour that I owe to Justice
He loses me for ever that seeks to save him:
Bind him I say, and like a wretch that knows
He stands condemned before he hears the Sentence,
With his base Agents, from my sight remove him,
And lodge them in the Dungeon: As a Queen
And Patronise to Justice I command it:
Thy tears are like unseasonable showers,
And in my heart now steeled can make no entrance:
Thou art cruel to thy self (Fool) it is not want
In me of soft compassion; when thou left'st
To be a Son, I ceased to be a Mother;
Away with them: The children I will leave
To keep my name to all posterities
Shall be the great examples of my Justice,
The government of my Country, which shall witness
How well I ruled my self: bid the wronged Ladies
Appear in Court to morrow, we will hear them;
And by one Act of our severity
For fear of punishment, or love to virtue,
Teach others to be honest: all will shun
To tempt her Laws, that would not spare her Son. 
Nay Nephew.
Pupil, hear but reason.
No, I have none, and will hear none; oh my honour,
My honour blasted in the bud, my youth,
My hopeful youth, and all my expectation
Ever to be a man are lost for ever.
Why Nephew, we as well as you are dubbed
Knights of the Pantofle.
And are shouted at,
Kicked, scorned, and laughed at by each Page and Groom,
Yet with erected heads we bear it.
Alas,
You have years, and strength to doe it; but were you
(As I) a tender grisly, apt to bow,
You would like me with Cloaks enveloped,
Walk thus, then stamp, then stare.
He will run mad
I hope, and then ell's mine.
Why look you Pupil,
There are for the recovery of your honour
Degrees of Medicines, for a tweak by the Nose
A man's to travel but fix months, then blow it
And all is well again: the Bastinado
Requires a longer time, a year or two,
And then it is buried: I grant you have been bafful'd,
It is but a journey of some thirty years
And it will be forgotten.
Think you so?
Assuredly.
He may make a shorter cut,
But hang, or drown himself, and on my life
Twill no more trouble him.
I could ne'er endure
Or Hemp or Water, they are dangerous tools
For youth to deal with: I will rather follow
My Tutors counsel.
Do so.
And put in
For my security, that isle not return
In thirty years, my whole state to my Uncle.
That I like well of.
Still provided Uncle,
That at my coming home you will allow me
To be of age, that I may call to account
This Page, that hath abused me.
It is a march.
Then Corinth, thus the bashful Lamprias
Takes leave of thee: and for this little time
Of thirty years will labour all he can,
Though he goes young forth, to come home a man. 
Are your Prisoners ready?
When it shall please the Queen
To call them forth my Lord.
Pray you doe me the favour
To tell me how they have borne themselves this night
Of their imprisonment?
Gladly Sir; your Brother
With the other Courtiers willingly received
All courtesies I could offer; eat, and drank,
And were exceeding merry, so dissembling
Their guilt, or confident in their innocence,
That I much wondered at it. But the Prince,
That (as borne highest) should have graced his fall
With greatest courage, is so sunk with sorrow,
That to a common judgement ye would seem
To suffer like a woman: but to me,
That from the experience I have had of many
Look further in him, I doe find the deep
Consideration of what's past, more fright him
Then any other punishment.
That is indeed
True magnanimity: the other but
A desperate bastard valour.
I pressed to him,
And notwithstanding the Queens strict command,
(Having your Lordships promise to secure me)
Offered to free him from his bonds, which he
Refused, with such a sorrow mixed with scorn
That it amazed me; yet I urged his Highness
To give one Reason for it: he briefly answered,
That he had sate in Judgement on himself,
And found that he deserved them: that he was
A Ravisher, and so to suffer like one,
Which is the reason of my tears: he adds,
For were it not I again should break the Laws,
By scorning all their rigour can inflict,
I should dye smiling.
I forbear to wonder
That you were moved that saw this: I am struck
With the relation so. It is very well;
See all things ready. I doe wish I could
Send comfort to the Prince; be ready with him;
It is in the Queens breast only, which for us 
To search into were sauciness, to determine
What she thinks fit.
Make way there for the Queen.
Read first the Law, and what our Ancestors
Have in this case provided, to deter
Such like offenders: To you gentle Ladies
This only, Would I could as well give comfort,
As bid you be secure from fear or doubt
Of our displeasure: be as confident
As if your plea were against a common man,
To have all right from us; I will not grieve
For what's not worth my pity: Read the Law.
Lycurgus the nineteenth against Rapes: It is provided, and publicly enacted and confirmed, That any man of what degree soever, offering violence to the chastity of a Virgin, shall (Ipso facto) be liable to her accusati∣on, and according to the said Law be censured; Ever provided, that it shall be in the choice of the said Virgin so abused, either to compel the Offender to Marry her without a Dowre, if so she will be satisfied, or demon∣ding his head for the offenoe, to have that accordingly performed.
You hear this: what doe you demand?
The benefit
The Law allows me.
For the injury
Done to mine Honour, I require his head.
I likewise have an eye upon mine Honour,
But knowing that his death cannot restore it
I ask him for my Husband.
I was Ravished,
And will have Justice.
I was Ravished too,
I kneel for mercy.
I demand but what
The Law allows me.
That which I desire
Is by the same Law warranted.
The Rape
On me, hath made a forfeit of his life,
Which in revenge of my disgrace I plead for.
The Rape on me gives me the privilege
To be his wife, and that is all I sue for.
A doubtful case.
Such pretty Lawyers, yet
I never saw, nor read of.
May the Queen
Favour your sweet plea, Madam.
Is that justice?
Shall one that is to suffer for a Rape
Be by a Rape defended? Look upon
The public enemy of chastity,
This lustful Satire, whose enraged desires
The ruin of one wretched Virgins honour
Would not suffice; and shall the wrack of two
Be his protection? May be I was ravished
For his lust only, thou for his defence;
O fine evasion! shall with such a slight
Your justice be deluded? your Laws cheated?
And he that for one fact deserved to die,
For sinning often find impunity?
But that I know thee, I would swear thou were
A false impostor, and subornd to this;
And it may be thou art Marion:
For had thou suffered truly what I have done,
Thou would like me complain, and call for vengeance,
And our wrongs being equal, I alone
Should not desire revenge: But be it so,
If thou prevail, even he will punish it,
And foolish mercy showed to him undo thee,
Consider, fool, before it be too late,
What joys thou can expect from such a husband,
To whom thy first, and what's more, forced embraces,
Which men say heighten pleasure, were distasteful.
It was in respect, that then they were unlawful,
Unblessed by Hymen, and left stings behind them,
Which from the marriage bed are ever banished.
Let this Court be then the image of Joves throne,
Upon which grace and mercy still attend,
To intercede between him and his Justice;
And since the Law allows as much to me
As she can challenge, let the milder sentence,
Which best becomes a Mother, and a Queen
Now overcome; nor let your wisdom suffer,
In doing right to her, I in my wrong
Endure a second Ravishment.
You can free him
Only from that which do's concern your self,
Not from the punishment that's due to me:
Your injuries you may forgive, not mine;
I plead mine own just wreak, which will right both,
Where that which you desire robs me of Justice;
It is that which I appeal to.
Bloody woman,
Dost thou desire his punishment? Let him live then;
For any man to marry where he likes not
Is still a lingering torment.
For one Rape
One death's sufficient, that way cannot catch me.
To you I fly then, to your mercy Madam,
Exempting not your Justice, be but equal;
And since in no regard I come behind her,
Let me not so be undervalued in
Your highness favour, that the world take notice
You so preferred her, that in her behalf
You killed that Son, you would not save for me;
Mercy, O mercy Madam.
Great Queen, Justice.
With what a Masculine constancy the grave Lady hath heard them both?
Yet how unmoved she sits
In that which most concerns her?
Now she rises,
And having well weighed both their arguments,
Resolves to speak.
And yet again she pauses;
O Conon, such a resolution once
A Roman told me he had seen in Cato
Before he killed himself.
It is now determined.
Marion, I could wish I were no Queen,
To give you satisfaction; no Mother
Beliza, to content you; and would part,
Even with my being, both might have their wishes;
But since that is impossible, in few words
I will deliver what I am resolved on:
The end for which all profitable Laws
Were made, looks two ways only, the reward
Of innocent good men, and the punishment
Of bad Delinquents: Ours, concerning Rapes,
Provided that same latter clause of Marriage
For him that had fallen once, not then foreseeing
Mankind could prove so monstrous, to tread twice
A path so horrid. The great Law-giver
Draco, That for his strange severity
Was said to write his sterne Decrees in blood,
Made none for Parricides, presuming that
No man could be so wicked: Such might be,
Lycurgus answer (did he live) for this.
But since I find that in my Son, which was not
Doubted in any else, I will add to it;
He cannot marry both, but for both dying,
Both have their full revenge: You see Beliza
You have your wish; with you Marion
Isle spend a tear or two, so Heaven forgive thee.
Upon my knees I do approve your judgement,
And beg that you would put it into act
With all speed possible; only that I may,
Having already made peace with my self,
Part so with all the world: Princely Agenor
I ask your pardon; yours my Lord Euphanes;
And Crates, with the rest too, I forgive you;
Do you the like for me: Yours, gracious Mother,
I dare not ask, and yet if that my death
Be like a Son of yours, though my life was not,
Perhaps you may vouchsafe it: Lastly that
Both these whom I have wronged, may wish my ashes
No heavy burden, ere I suffer death,
For the restoring of Meriones honour,
Let me be married to her, and then dye
For you Beliza.
Thou hast made in this
Part of amends to me, and to the world,
Thy suit is granted, call a Flamen forth
To do this holy work; with him a Headsman.
Raise up thy weeping eyes Marion,
With this hand I confirm thy Marriage,
Wishing that now the Gods would show some miracle,
That this might not divorce it.
To that purpose
I am their Minister; stand not amazed,
To all your comforts I will do this wonder,
Your Majesty (with your pardon I must speak it)
Allowed once heretofore of such a Contract,
Which you repenting afterwards, revoked it,
Being fully bent to match her with Agenor,
The grieved Prince knowing this, and yet not daring
To cross what you determined, by an Oath
Bound me and these his followers to doe something
That he might once enjoy her, we sworn to it,
And easily persuaded, being assured
She was his Wife before the face of Heaven,
Although some Ceremonious forms were wanting,
Committed the first Rape, and brought her to him,
Which broke the Marriage; but when we perceived
He purposed to abuse our ready service
In the same kind, upon the chaste Beliza,
Holding our selves less tied to him then goodness;
I made discovery of it to my Brother,
Who can relate the rest.
It is most true.
I would it were.
In every circumstance
It is upon my soul: For this known to me,
I wan Marion in my Ladies habit,
To be again (but willingly) surprised,
But with Agenor, and her noble Brother,
With my approved friend Conon, with such speed
She was pursued, that the lewd act scarce ended,
The Prince (assured he had enjoyed Beliza,
For all the time Meriones face was covered)
Was apprehended, and b•ought to your presence,
But not till now discovered, in respect
I hoped the imminent danger of the Prince,
To which his loose unquenched heats had brought him,
Being pursued unto the latest trial
Would work in him compunction, which it has done;
And these two Ladies in their feigned contentions,
To your delight I hope have served as Mockers
To their own Nuptials.
My choice was worthy
When first I looked on thee, as thou hast ordered
All shall be done, and not the meanest that
Plaid in this unexpected Comedy,
But shall partake our bounty: And my Lord,
That with the rest you may seem satisfied,
If you dare venture on a Queen, not yet
So far in debt to years▪ but that she may
Bring you a lusty Boy, I offer up
My self and Kingdom during my life to you.
It is a blessing which I durst not hope for,
But with all joy receive.
We all applaud it.
Then on unto the Temple, where the rights
Of Marriage ended, we will find new delights. 

