INterpret not Clarissa, my true zeal
in giving you council, to transcend the bounds
That should confine a brother; tic your honour,
And peace of mind (which honour last will leave you)
I labour to preserve, and though you yet are
Pure and untainted, and resolve to be so:
Having a Fathers eye, and Mothers care
In all your ways to keep you fair, and upright.
In which respects my best advises must
Appear superfluous; yet since love dear sister
Will sometimes tender things unnecessary,
Misconstrue not my purpose.
Sir, I dare not:
But still receive it as a large addition,
To the much that I already stand ingagd for,
Yet pardon me, though I profess upon
A true examination of my self,
Even to my private thoughts I cannot find
(Having such strong supporters to uphold me)
On what slight ground the least doubt can be raised
To render me suspected I can fall,
Or from my fame or virtue.
Far be it from me,
To nourish such a thought; and yet excuse me,
As you would doe a lapidary, whose whole fortunes
Depend upon the safety of one Jewel
If he think no case precious enough
To keep it in full lustre nor no locks,
Though lending strength to Iron doors sufficient
To guard it, and secure him; you to me are
A Gem of more esteem, and prized higher
Then Usurers doe their muck, or great men title.
And any flaw (which heaven avert) in you,
(Whose reputation like a Diamond
Cut newly from the rock, women with envy,
And men with covetous desires look up at)
By prying eyes discovered, in a moment
Would render what the braveries of Florence
For want of counterpoise, forbear to cheapen,
Of little or no value.
I see brother.
The mark you shoot at, and much thank your love;
But for my Virgin Jewel which is brought
In comparison with your Diamond, rest assured
It shall not fall in such a workmans hands
Whose Ignorance or Malice shall have power
To cast one cloud upon it, but still keep
Her native splendour.
Tic well, I commend you;
And study your advancement with that care
As I would doe a Sisters, whom I love
With more then common order.
That from me,
I hope's returned to you.
I doe confess it,
Yet let me tell you (but still with that love,
I wish to increase between us) that you are
Observed against the gravity long maintained
In Jtaly (where to see a maid unmaskd
Is held a blemish) to be over frequent
In giving or receiving visits.
How?
Whereas the custom is here to woo by picture,
And never see the substance: you are fair,
And beauty draws temptations on; You know it,
I would not live to say a willing grant
From you to one unworthy of your birth,
Feature or fortune; yet there have been Ladies
Of rank, proportion, and of means beyond you,
That have proved this no miracle.
One unworthy?
Why pray you gentle brother, who are they That I vouchsafe these bounties to? I hope
In your strict Criticism of me, and my manners,
That you will not deny they are your equals.
Angry?
I have reason, but in cold blood tell me,
Had we not one Father?
Yes, and Mother to.
And he a Souidier.
True;
If I then borrow
A little of the boldness of his temper,
Imparting it to such as may deserve it;
(How ere indulgent to your selves, you brothers
Allow no part of freedom to your sisters)
I hope twill not pass for a crime in me,
To grant access and speech to noble suitors;
And you escape for innocent, that descend
To a thing so far beneath you. Are you touched?
Why did you think that you had Giges ring,
Or the herb that gives invisibility?
Or that Bianchas name had ne'er bin mentiond;
The fair maid of the grand Osteria brother.
No more.
A little brother. Your night walks,
And offered presents; which coy she contemnd,
Your combats in disguises with your rivals,
Brave Muleteers. Scullions perfumed with grease,
And such as cry meat for Cats must be rememberd;
And all this pother for a common trull,
A tempting sign, and curiously set forth,
To draw in riotous guests, a thing exposd
To every Ruffians rude assault; and subject
For a poor salary, to a rich mans lust,
Though made up of diseases.
Will you end yet?
And this a Mistress for Albertus son,
One that I should call sister?
Part not with
Your modesty in this violent heate; the truth is,
(For you shall be my Confessor) I love her,
But virtuously; report that gives her out
Only for fair, and adds not she is chaste,
Detracts much from her: for indeed she is,
Though of a low condition; composed
Of all those graces, dames of highest birth,
Though rich in natures bounties, should be proud of;
But leave her, and to you my nearest care,
My dearest best Clarissa. Doe not think
(For then you wrong me) I wish you should live
A barren Virgin life; I rather aim at
A noble husband, that may make you mother
Of many children, one that when I know him
Worth your embraces, I may serve, and sue to:
And therefore scorn not to acquaint me with
That man, that happy man; you please to favour.
I ever purposd it, for I will like
With your allowance:
As a pawn of this;
Receive this ring, but ere you part with it
On any terms, be certain of your choice;
And make it known to me.
You have my hand for it;
Which were it not my sisters, I should kiss
With too much heate.
My Father, and his guests Sir.
O my old friend, my tried friend; my Baptist:
These days of rest, and feasting, suit not with
Our tougher natures, those were golden ones,
Which were enjoyd at Sea; thats our true Mother:
The Land's to us a stepdame; there we sought
Honour, and wealth through dangers; yet those dangers
Delighted more then their rewards, though great ones,
And worth the undertakers: here we study
The Kitchen arts, to sharpen appetite,
Dulde with abundance, and dispute with Heaven;
If that the least puff of the rough Northwinde,
Blast our times burden, rendering to our Palats
The charming juice less pleasing; whereas there
If we had biscuit, powderd flesh, fresh water:
We thought them Persian delicates, and for music
If a strong gale but made the maine yard crack,
We danced to the loud minstrel.
And feared less,
(So far we were in love with noble action)
A tempest then a calm.
Tic true Baptist;
There, there, from mutual aids lent to each other,
And virtuous emulation to exceed
In manly daring, the true school of friendship,
We learnt those principles, which confirmed us friends
Never to be forgot.
Never I hope.
We were married there, for bells the roaring Cannon,
A loud proclaimed it lawful, and a prize
Then newly tan and equally divided,
Served as a dowry to you, then stilt my wife;
And did enable me to be a husband,
Fit to encounter so much wealth though got
With blood and horror.
If so got, tic fit Sir
Now you possess it, that you should enjoy it
In peace, and quiet; I, your son, and daughter
That reap the harvest of your winters labour,
Though debtors for it yet have often trembled,
When in way of discourse, you have related
How you came by it.
Trembled? how the softness
Of your sex may excuse you, Isle not argue,
But to the world, how ere I hold thee noble
I should proclaim this boy some cowards bastard,
And not the Image of Albertus youth:
If when some wished occasion calls him forth,
To a brave trial, one weak artery
Of his should show a fever, though grim death
Put on a thousand dreadful shapes to fright him;
The Elements, the sea and all the winds
We number on our compass, then conspiring
To make the Scion more ghastly; I must have thee
Sir, I must. If once you grapple with
An enemies ship, to board her, though you see
The desperate Gunner ready to give fire,
And blow the deck up, or like Cesars Soldier
Thy hands like his cut off, hang by the teeth,
And die undaunted.
I even dye to hear you:
My son, my loved Cesario run such hazards?
Blesd Saints forbid it: you have done enough
Already for one family, that rude way;
Isle keep him safe at home, and train him up
A complete Courtier: may I live to see him,
By sweet discourse, and gracious demeanour,
Win, and bring home a fair wife, and a rich;
Tic all I rest ambitious of.
A Wife!
As if there were a course to purchase one
Prevailing more then honourable action?
Or any Intercessors move so far,
To take a Mistress of a noble spirit,
As the true fame of glorious victories,
Achievd by sweat and blood! ?? the brave dames
Of warlike Genoa! they had eyes to see
The inward man, and only from his worth,
Courage, and conquests: the blind Archer knew
To head his shafts, or light his quenched torch,
They were proof against them else.
No Carpet Knight
That spent his youth in groves, or pleasant bowers;
Or stretching on a Couch his lazy limbs,
Sung to his Lute such soft and melting notes,
As Ovid, nor Anacreon ever knew,
Could work on them, nor once bewitch their sense;
Though he came so perfumd as he had robbed
Sabaea, or Arabia, of their wealth;
And stord it in one suit:
I still remember,
And still remember it with joy Baptist,
When from the resceu of the Genoa fleet,
Almost surprised by the Venetian Galleys,
Thou did return, and were received in triumph.
How lovely in thy honoured wounds and scars
Thou did appear? what worlds of amorous glances
The beauties of the City (where they stood,
Fixed like so many of the fairest stars)
Shot from their windows at thee? how it fired
Their bloods to see the Enemies captive streams
Borne through the streets? nor could chaste Juliana
The Dukes fair Niece, though guarded with their great???ness
Resist this gallant charge, but laying by
Disparity of fortune from the object,
Yielded her self thy prisoner.
Pray you choose some other theme.
Can there be one more pleasing?
That triumph drew on me a greater torture,
And tic in the remembrance little less
Then ever Captive suffered.
How? to gain the favour of so great a Lady?
Yes, since it proved fatal, to have bin happy Madam
Adds to calamity, had the heavy loss
Of her I durst not hope for once injoyd,
Turns what you think a blessing to a curse,
Which grief would have forgotten.
I am sorry I touched upon it.
I burn rather Sir,
With a desire to hear the story of
your loves, and shall receive it as a favour,
Which you may grant.
You must not be denied,
Yet with all brevity I must report it;
Tic true fair Iuliana (Genoas pride)
Enamord of my actions, liked my person;
Nor could I but with joy meet her affection;
Since it was lawful, for my first wife dead;
We were closly married, and for some few months
Tasted the fruits of't; but malicious fate,
Envying our too much happiness, wrought upon
A faithless servant, privy to our plot,
And Cabinet Councellor to Juliana,
Who either for hope or reward, or fear,
Discovered us to the incensed Duke:
Whose rage made her close prisoner, and pronouncd
On me perpetual banishment: some three years
I wandered on the Seas, since entertained
By the great Duke of Florence; but what fate
Attended her? or Prospero my friend,
That stayed at Genoa, to expect the issue,
Is yet uncertain. 
From the Duke:
Hoe's welcome, to end my forced relation.
Signior Baptist;
The great Dukes will commands your present ear.
It points indeed at both of you;
I wait it.
In Mariana, to your rest.
Nay leave us, we must be private.
Stay not long Caesario:
So these old men vanished tic allowed,
That we may speak, and how so ere they take
Delight in the discourse of former dangers,
It cannot hinder us to treat a little
Of present pleasures.
Which if we well injoyd,
Will not alone continue, but increase
In us their friendship.
How shall we spend the night?
To snore it out like drunken Dutchman, would
Sort ill with us Italians. We are made
Of other metal, fiery, quick, and active;
Shall we take our fortune? and while our cold fathers
(In whom long since our youthful heats were dead,)
Talk much of Mars, serve under Venus Ensigns,
And seek a Mistress?
Thats a game dear friend,
That does admit no rivaled in chase of it,
And either to be undertook alone,
Or not to be attempted.
I'll not press you:
What other sports to entertain the time with
The following morning?
Any that may become us.
Is the Neapolitan horse the Vireroy sent you,
In a fit plight to run?
So my Groom tells me,
I can boast little of my horsemanship;
Yet upon his assurance, I dare wager
A thousand Crowns, against any horse in Florence,
For an eight mile course.
I would not win of you,
In respect you are impatient of loss:
Else I durst match him with my Barberry
For twice the sum.
You doe well to excuse it, being certain to be beaten.
Tush. You know the contrary.
To end the controversy.
Put it to trial, by my life isle meet you
With the next rising sun.
A match. But here
Appears a Cynthian, that scorns to borrow
A beam of light from the great eye of Heaven:
She being her self all brightness; how I envy
Those amorous smiles, those kisses, but sure chaste ones
Which she vouchsafes her brother?
You are wanton:
Pray you think me not Biancha, leave I pray you;
My Mother will not sleep before she see you,
And since you know her tenderness, nay fondness;
In every circumstance that concerns your safety,
You are not equal to her.
I must leave you, but will not fail to meet you.
Soft sleeps to you.
Cesario.
You are called again.
Some sons
Complain of too much rigour in their Mothers;
I of too much indulgence; you will follow. 
You are her first care, therefore lead the way.
She stays: blessed opportunity, she stays?
As she invited conference, she was ever
Noble, and free; but thus to tempt my frailty,
Argues a yielding in her; or contempt
Of all that I dare offer; stand I now
Consulting? No, isle put it home.
Who waits there? more lights.
You need them not, they are as uselsse,
As at noone-day; can there be darkness, where
Nature then wisely liberal, vouchsafed
To lend two Suns.
Hyperboles:
No, truths.
Truths beauteous virgin, so my lovesick heart
Assures me, and my understanding tells me
I must approach them wisely, should I rashly
Press near their scorching beams, they would consume me
And on the contrary should your disdain
Keep me at too much distance, and I want
Their comfortable heate, the frost of death
Would seize on all my faculties.
Pray you pause sir.
This vehemence of discourse must else needs tire you.
These gay words take not me, tic simple faith
Honest jntegrity, and lawful flames
I am delighted with:
Such I bring with me, and therefore Lady,
But that you took me off
Ere I came to a period. I had added
A long experience must bee required
Both of his faith and trust with whom a virgin
Trafficks for whats dearest in this life,
Her liberty, and honour; I confess
I oft have viewed you with an eye of favour,
And with your generous parts the many tenders
Of doing me all fair offices, have won
A good opinion from me.
Oh speak ever, I never heard such music;
Clae, a Plain tune sir:
But tic a hearty one; when I perceive
By evident proofs, your aims are truly noble,
And that you bring the Engines of fair love,
Not of foul lust, to shake and undermine
My maiden fortress: I may then make good
What now I dare not promise.
You already
In taking notice of my poor deservings,
Have been magnificent, and twill appear
A frontlesse Impudence to ask beyond this,
Yet qualify, though not excuse my error,
Though now I am ambitious to desire
A confirmation of it.
So it wrong not my modesty to grant it,
Tic far from me,
I only am a suitor, you would grace me
With some toy, but made rich in that you wore it,
To warrant to the world that I usurp not
When I presume to stile my self your servant,
A rebind from your shoe,
You are too humble,
Isle think upon it; and something of more value
Shall witness how I prize you, it grows late,
Isle bring you to the door,
You still more bind me, 
YOU find by this assured jntelligence
The preparation of the Turk against us.
We have met him oft and beat him; now to fear him
Would argue want of courage, and I hold it
A safer policy for us and our signories
To charge him in his passage ore the sea'
Then to expect him here.
May it please your highness
Since you vouchsafe to think me worthy of
This great employment, if I may deliver
My judgment freely, tic not flattery
Though I say my opinion waits on you,
Nor would I give my suffrage and consent
To what you have proposed, but that I know it
Worth the great speaker, though that the denial
Called on your heavy anger. For my self
I do profess thus much, if a blunt Soldier,
May borrow so much from the old tongued Courtier,
(That echoes what so ere the Prince allows of)
All that my long experience hath taught me
That have spent three parts of my life at sea,
(Let it not taste of arrogance that I say it)
Could not have added reasons of more waite
To fortify your affections, then such
As your grace out of observation merely
Already have propounded.
With the honour to give the daring enemy an affront
In being the first opposer it will teach
Your Soldiers boldness: and strike fear in them
That durst attempt you.
Victuals and ammunition,
And money too the sinews of the war, are stored up in the Magazine.
And the galleys new rigd and trained up.
And at two days warning fit for the service.
We commend your care,
Nor will we ere be wanting in Our counsels,
As we doubt not your action; you Baptist
Shall stay with us; that Merchant is not wise
That ventures his whole fortunes in one bottom.
Be our Admiral, spare your thanks,
His merit in you that jnvites this honour,
Preserve it such; ere long you shall hear more,
Things rashly undertaken end as ill,
But great acts thrive when reason guides the will.
No question it was not well done in Caesario
To cross the horse of young Mentivole.
In the midst of this course.
That was not all, the switching him duld him,
Would that both the jades
Had broke their necks, when they first started; light,
We stand here prating, give them leave to whisper.
And when they have cut one another throats
Make in to part em.
There is no such hazard,
Their fathers friendship, and their love forbid it;
See where they come!
With fury in their looks.
You have the wages, with what foul play got
Isle not dispute:
Foul play,
I cannot speak it
In a fairer language, and if some respects
Familiar to my self chaind not my tongue,
I should say no more. I should, but Isle sit down,
With this disgrace; how ere press me no farther.
For if once more provoked, you'll understand
I dare no more suffer an Injury
Then I dare doe one,
Why sir are you injured
In that I take my right which I would force,
Should you detain it?
Put it to judgement.
No my will in this shall carry it,
Your will? nay farewell softness then. 
This I foresaw,
Hold hold,
I am hurt
Shift for your self, tic death.
As you respect me, bear him off with care,
If he miscarry since he did the wrong,
Isle stand the shock of't.
Gently, he will faint else 
And speedily I beseech you; my rage over
That port upon my reason clouds of error,
I see my folly, and at what dear loss
I have exchangd a real innocence
To gain a mere fantastical report,
Transported only by vain popular wind,
To bee a daring nay fool hardy man. 
But could I satisfy my self within here,
How should I bear my fathers frown? They meet me,
My guilt conjures him hither.
Sir:
Sir:
I have met the trophies of your ruffian sword:
Was there no other Anvil to make trial
How far thou durst be wicked, but the bosom
Of him which under the adulterate name
Of friendship thou hast murder?
Murderd sir?
My dreams abhor so base a fact; true valour
Employed to keep my reputation fair
from the austerest judge, can never merit
To be branded with that title; you begot me
A man, no coward; and but call your youth
To memory, when injured you could never
Boast of the Asses fortitude, slavelike patience:
And you might justly doubt I were your son,
If I should entertain it; if Caesario
Recover, as I hope his wound's not mortal,
A second trial of what I dare doe
In a just cause, shall give strong witness for me
I am the true heir to Baptistas courage
As to his other fortunes.
Boy, to neither:
But on this strict condition, Which jntreaties
From Saints, nay Angels, shall not make me alter.
A friendship so began, and so continued
Between me and Alberto my best friend,
Your brawls shall not dissolve; it is my will
And as I am thy father, I command thee,
That jnstantly on any terms how poor
So ere it skils not, thou desire his pardon
And bring assurance to me has signed it,
Or by my fathers soul isle never know thee:
But as a stranger to my blood; perform it,
And suddenly without reply, I have said it.
And in it given a heavier sentence on me
Then the most cruel death; you are my father
And your will to be served, and not disputed
By me that am your son: but isle obey,
And though my heart strings crack for it, make it known,
When you command, my faculties are your own. 
HAve patience, Noble Sir; your son Caesario
Will recover without question.
A slight wound.
Though it pierced his body, it hath missed the vitals.
My life for it, he shall take the air again within these 10. days.
O but from a friend,
To receive this blody measure from a friend!
If that a man should meet a violent death
In a place where he had taken sanctuary,
Would it not grieve him? such all Florence held
Their friendship, and tic that which multiplies
The injury.
Have patience worthy Signior.
I doe protest as I am man and soldier,
If I had buried him in a wave at sea,
(Lost in some honourable action)
I would not to the saltness of his grave
Have added the least tear; but these quarrels
Bred out of game and wine, I had as lief
He should have died of a surfeit.
Oh what comfort? How is it with our son Sir?
His Work-masters
Bear in my hand here as my Lawyer does,
When I have a cracked title, or bad suit in Law,
All shall go well.
I pray you Gentle. what think you of his wound
Tic but a scratch, nothing to danger.
But he received it from a friend,
And the unkindness tan at that, may kill him.
Let me see him:
By no means, he slumbers.
Then I cannot believe you,
When you tell me ther'es hope of him.
Yet many Ladies
Doe give him more faith to their Physician
Then to their Confessor.
O my poor lost brother,
And friend more dear then brother.
More loud instruments
To disturb his slumbers! go, go, take Caroch:
And as you love me, you and the Girl retire
To our Summer house, 'ith Country; isle be with you
Within these two days.
I am yours in all things,
Though with much sorrow to leave him. 
I pray you Gentlemen,
With best observance tend your Patient;
The loss of my heir Male, lies now a bleeding.
And think what payment his recovery. 
Shall shower upon you.
Of all men breathing,
Wherefore doe you arrive here? are you mad?
My injury begins to bleed a fresh
At sight of you; why this affront of your
I receive more malicious then the other.
Your hurt was only danger to my son:
But your sight to me is death; why come you hither?
Do you come to view the wounds, which yo have made?
And glory in them?
Rather worthy Sir, to power oil into them.
I am a Soldier Sir,
Least part of Courtier, and understand
By your smooth oil
Your present flattery.
Sir, for my Fathers sake acknowledge me
To be borne a Gentleman, no slave; I ever
Held flatterers of that breed; do not misconstrue
In your distaste of me, the true intent
Of my coming hither, for I doe protest
I doe not come to tell you I am sorry
For your sons hurt.
Not sorry?
No not sorry; I have to the lowest ebb, lost all my fury:
But I must not lose my honesty; it was he
Gave heate unto the injury, which returned
(Like a Potter ill lighted into 'th bosom
Of him gave fire to it) yet I hope his hurt,
Is not so dangerous, but he may recover;
When if it please him, call me to account,
For the loss of so much blood, I shall be ready
To doe him noble reason.
You are armed me thinks with wondrous confi???dence.
O with the best Sir;
For I bring penitence, and satisfaction.
Satisfaction? Why I heard you say but now,
You were not sorry for his wounds.
Nor am I: the satisfaction which I bring Sir, is to you;
You are a Gentleman ne'er injurd me;
One ever loved my Father, the right way,
And most approved of noble amity.
Yet I have run my sword quite through your heart.
And slightly hurt your son; for it may be feared,
A grief tan at these years for your sons loss,
May hazard yours: And therefore I am sent
By him that has most interest in your sorrow;
Who having chid me almost to the ruin
Of a disheritance, for violating
So continue and so sacred a friendship
Of 50. winters standing: such a friendship,
That ever did continue like the spring;
Ne'er saw the fall of the leaf; by him I am sent
To say the wrong I have done Sir, is to you:
And that I have quite lost him for a Father,
Until I find your pardon; nay there follows
A weightier deprivation; his estate
I could with a less number of sighs part with.
Fortune might attend my youth, and my deservings
In any Climate: but a Fathers blessing,
To settle and confirm that fortune, no where;
But only here. Your pardon, give me that;
And when you have done, kill me; for tic that
Takes from me the effect of excommunication;
A Fathers heavy curse.
Nay, may that curse
Light on himself, for sending thee in this minute:
When I am grown as deaf to all compassion,
As the cruelest Sea fight, or most horrid tempest.
That I had drowned in the Sea a thousand ducats,
Thou had not made this visit: rash young man,
Thou take me in an ill Planet, and hast cause
To curse thy Father; for I doe protest,
If I had met thee in any part of the world,
But under my own roof, I would have killed thee.
Look you!
Here's a triumph sent for the death of your young Master.
Shall we kill him?
No, Isle not be so unhospitable; but Sir,
By my life, I vow to take assurance from you,
That right hand never more shall strike my son.
That will be easily protested.
Not easily, when it must be exacted, and a bloody seal to it.
Bind him, and cut off's right hand presently:
Fair words shall never satisfy foul deeds.
Chop's hand off.
You cannot be so unrighteous, to your own ho???nor.
O sir, collect your self;
And recall your bloody purpose.
My intents of this nature, do ever come to action
Then I must fetch another stickler. 
Yet I doe grieve at heart;
And I doe curse thy Father heartily,
That's the cause of my dishonour; sending thee
In such an hour, when I am apt for mischief:
Apt as a Dutch man after a Sea-fight,
When his Enemy kneels before him; come dispatch.
Entreat him Noble Sir;
You shall excuse me;
Whatsoever he dares doe, that I dare suffer.
Oh sir, for honours sake stay your foul purpose,
For if you do proceed thus cruelly,
There is no question in the wound you give him,
I shall bleed to death for it.
Thou art not of my temper,
What I purpose, cannot be altered.
Sir; the Duke
With all speed expects you. You must instantly
Ship all your followers, and to sea.
My blessing stay with thee upon this condition,
Take away his use of fighting; as thou hop'st
To be accounted for my son, perform't. 
You hear what I am injoynd too.
Pray thee take it,
Only this ring, this best esteemed Jewel:
I will not give it to'th hangman chops it off;
It is to dear a relic. Isle remove it nearer my heart.
Ha, that ring's my sisters.
The ring I injoynd her never part withal
Without my knowledge; come sir, we are friends:
Pardon my fathers heate, and melancholy;
Two violent Fevers which he caught at Sea,
And cannot yet shake off: only one promise
I must enjoin you to, and seriously.
Hereafter you shall never draw a sword
To the prejudice of my life.
By my best hopes I shall not.
I pray deliver me your sword
On that condition.
I shall Sir, may it hereafter
Ever fight on your part.
Noble Sir, I thank you;
But for performance of your vow, I entreat
Some gage from you.
Any Sir.
Deliver me that ring.
Ha, this ring? indeed this Jewel binds me,
If you knew the virtue of it, never more
To draw my sword against you.
Therefore I will have it.
You may not.
Come: you must.
I that by violence could take your hand,
Can enforce this from you; this is a token Sir,
That we may prove friends hereafter. 
Why did you ceise his sword Sir?
To perform what my Father bade me,
I have for the present tan away his
Use of fighting.
Better so,
Then take that which your Father meant.
Was ever the like usage? ?? that ring!
Dearer then life, whether is honour fled
Cesario? Thou art unmanly in each part,
To seize my sword first and then split my heart. 
Thy Master that lodges here in my Hosteria,
Is a rare man of art, they say hoe's a Witch.
A witch? Nay hoe's one step of the Ladder to preferment higher, he is a Conjurer?
Is that his higher title.
Yes, I assure you, for a Conjurer is the Devils Master, and commands him; whereas a witch is the Devils Prentice and obeys him.
Bound Prentice to the Devil!
Bound and inrolld I assure you, he cannot start; and therefore I would never wish any Gentleman to turn Witch.
Why man.
Oh he looses his gentility by it, the Devil in this case cannot help him, he must go to the Herald for new arms believe it.
As I am true Inkeper, yet a Gentleman borne,
Isle ne'er turn witch for that trick,
And thou hast bin a great Traveller.
No indeed, not I Sir;
Come you are modest.
No I am not modest, for I told you a lye, that you might the better understand I have bin a traveller.
So sir, they say your Master is a great Physician too
He was no fool told you that, I assure you.
And you have been in England, but they say La???dies in England take a great deal of Physic.
Both ways on my reputation.
So tic to be understood:
But they say Ladies there take Physic for fashion.
Yes sir, and many times dye to keep fashion.
How? dye to keep fashion!
Yes, I have known a Lady sick of the small Pockets, only to keep her face from Pitholes, take cold, strike them in again, kick up the heals and vanish.
There was a kicking up the heals with a witness.
No Sir; I confess a good face has many times bin the motive to the kicking up of the heals with a wit???ness: but this was not.
Here comes my wife and daughter.
You have a pretty commodity of this night worm?
Why man?
She is a pretty lure to draw custom to your ordinary.
Dost think I keep her to that purpose?
When a Dove-house is empty, there is cumin-seed used to purloin from the rest of the neighbours; In England you have several Adamants, to draw in spurs and rapiers; one keeps silk-worms in a Gallery: A Mil???liner has choice of Monkeys, and Paraketoes; another shows bawdy East Indian Pictures, worse than ever were Aretines, a Goldsmith keeps his wife wedged in???to his shop like a Mermaid, nothing of her to bee seen (thats woman) but her upper part.
Nothing but her upper part?
Nothing but her upper bodies, and he lives at the more hearts ease.
Whats the reason?
Because her nether part can give no temptation; by your leave sir, isle tend my Master, and instantly bee with you for a cup of Cheerly this hot weather.
A nimble pated rascal, come hither daughter, when was Cesario here?
Sir not this fortnight.
I doe not like his visits, commonly
He comes by Owle-light, both the time and manner
Is suspicious; I doe not like it.
Sir, the Gentleman
Is every way so noble, that you need not
Question his intent of coming, though you did;
Pray Sir preserve that good opinion of me,
That though the custom of the place I was borne in
Makes me familiar to every guest,
I shall in all things keep my self a stranger
To the vices they bring with them.
Right my daughter?
She has the right strain of her mother.
Of her mother?
And I would speak, I know from whence she took it;
When I was as young I was as honest.
Leave your prating,
And study to be drunk; and abuse your guests over, and over,
Peace wife. My honourable guest,
My indeard Landlord?
And the rest of the complements of the house.
Breakfast is ready Sir;
It waits only the tide of your stomach.
And mine gapes for it like a stale Oyster.
Ere you go to bed, fail not of that I pray.
We will instantly be with you;
Now we are all fellows.
Nine a clock, and no clients come
Yet, sure thou dost not set up bills enough.
I have set up bills in abundance.
What bills?
Marry for curing of all diseases,
Recovery of stolen goods,
And a thousand such impossibilities.
The place is unlucky,
No certain, tic scarcity of money; doe not you here the Lawyers complain of it? men have as much ma???lice as ever they had to wrangle, but they have no money: whether should this money be tralaunct?
To the Devil I think.
Tic with his cofferer I am certain, that's the Usurer.
Our cheating does not prosper so well as it was wont to doe.
No sure, why in England we cooed cozen 'em as familiarly, as if we had travaild with a Brief, or a Lot???terie.
In the Low-countries we did pretty well.
So so, as long as we kept the Mop-headed butter-boxes sober; marry when they were drunk, then they grew buzzards: You should have them reel their heads to???gether, and deliberate; your Dutchman indeed when he is foxed, is like a Fox; for when hoe's sunk in drink, quite earth to a mans thinking, tic full Exchange time with him, then hoe's subtlest; but your Switzert, was nothing to cheat him.
Nothing?
No nor conscience to bee made of it; for since nature afore-hand consent him of his wit, it was the less sin for us to cozen him of his money.
But these Italians are more nimble-pated, wee must have some new trick for them, I protest but that our Hostess daughter is a sweet lass, and draws great resort to'th house, we were as good draw teeth a horseback.
I told 'em in the Market place you could conjure, and no body would believe me: but ere long I will make'em believe you can conjure with such a figuary.
What language shal's conjure in? high Dutch
I think, that's full in the mouth.
No, no, Spanish, that roars best; and will appear more dreadful.
Prithee tell me thy conceit thou hast to gull them.
No, no, I will not steal it; but my dear Iews-trump, for thou art but my instrument, I am the plotter, and when we have cozened 'em most titely, thou shalt steal away the Inn-keepers daughter, I'll provide my self of another moveable: and wee will most purely re???tire our selves to Geneva.
Thou art the compass I sail by.
Was ever expectation of so Noble
A requital answered with such contumely!
A wild Numidian that had sucked a Tigress,
Would not have bin so barbarous; did he threat
To cut thy hand off?
Yes Sir, and his slaves were ready to perform't.
What hindered it?
Only his sons entreaty.
Noble youth,
I wish thou were not of his blood; thy pity
Gives me a hope thou art not.
You mistake Sir,
The injury that followed from the son,
Was worse then the fathers; he did first disarm and took from me a Jewel which I prize above my hand or life.
Take thy sword from thee?
He stole it like a thief rather, he could not
In the field deprive thee of it.
He took it from me,
And sent me forth so thin, and so unmade up,
As if I had bin a Foote-boy.
O my fury!
I must now ask thee forgiveness, that my rashness
Bred out of too much friendship, did expose thee
To so eminent a danger; which I vow
I will revenge on the whole Family:
All the calamities of my whole life,
My banishment from Genoa, my wives loss
Compared to this indignity is nothing;
Their Family shall repaired; it shall be to them
Like a plague, when the Dog-star reigns most hot:
An Italians revenge may pause, butt's ne'er forgot. 
I would I had concealed this from my father,
For my interest in Clarissa; my care now
Must be to untangle this division,
That our most equal flames may be united;
And from these various and perturbed streams
Rise like a sweet morn after terrible dreams.??? 
I am happy in your recovery,
And I Sister, am ever best pleased in your happiness:
But I wish a toy should be on your finger.
My Ring this morning when I washed
I put it off, ti's in my window.
Wher's your Looking-glasse?
Here Sir.
It is a fair one.
It is pure Crystal.
Can a Diamond cut in Crystal? let me see,
I'll grave my name in it.
Oh, you'll spoil my glass.
Would you not have your brother in your eye?
I had thought he had bin Planted in your heart,
Look you, the Diamond cuts quaintly, you are cozened,
Your Crystal is too brittle.
It is the Ring
I gave unto Mentivole, sure the same.
You put me to amazement Sir, and horror;
How came you by that ring?
Does the blood rise?
Pray Sir resolve me, ?? for pity doe;
And take from me a trembling at the heart,
That else will kill me: for I too much fear
Nothing but Death could ravish ir from his hand
That wore it.
Was it given to Mentivola on that condition?
Tell me of his health first.
And then I'll tell you any thing.
By my life he's well,
In better health then I am.
Then it was Sir.
Then shall I ever hate thee, oh thou false one;
Hast thou a Faith to give unto a friend,
And break it to a brother? did I not
By all the ties of blood importune thee
Never to part with it without my knowledge?
Thou might have given it to a Muleteer,
And made a contract with him in a stable
At as cheap a price of my vengeance: never more
Shall a Women's trust beguile me; You are all
Like Relics: you may well be looked upon,
But come a man to'th handling of you once,
You fall in pieces.
Dear Sir, I have no way
Looked either beneath reason or my self
In my election; there's parity in our blood,
And in our fortunes, ancient amity
Betwixt our parents: to which wants nothing,
But the fruit of blessed marriage between us,
To add to their posterities: nor does now
Any impeachment rise, except the sad
And unexpected quarrel which divided
So noble and so excellent a friendship,
Which as I ner'e had Magic to foresee
So I could not prevent.
Well you must give me leave
To have a hand in your disposing, I shall
In the absence of my father be your Guardian;
His Suit must pass through my office. Mentivole,
He has too much of my blood already; he has,
And he gets no more of't???
Wherefore weep you mother?
It is occasioned by a sorrow,
Wherein you have a child's part, and the mainest,
Your Father's dead.
Dead?
There's one can relate the rest.
I can Sir, your Father's drowned,
Most unfortunately drowned.
How? in a tempest?
No Sir, in a calm,
calm as this evening; the Gunner being drunk,
Forgot to fasten the Ordnance to their ports,
When came a sudden gust which tumbled them
All to the starboord side, o'returnd the ship,
And sunk her in moment, some six men
That were upon the deck were saved: the rest
Perished with your Father.
O my dearest Father???
I pray thee leave us.
I have a sorrow of another nature, equal to the former.
And most commonly they come together.
The Family of the Baptist
Are grown to faction, and upon distaste
Of the injury late offered in my house,
Have vowed a most severe, and fell revenge
Against all our family, but especially
Against you my dear Caesario.
Let them threat, I am prepared to oppose them.
And is your loss then
Of so easy an estimation, what comfort
Have I but in your life, and your late danger
Presents before me what I am to suffer,
Should you miscarry; therefore isle advise you
When the Funeral is over, you would travail,
Both to prevent their fury, and wear out the injury.
No Mother, I will not travail,
So in my absence he may marry my Sister,
I will not travail certain.
O my Caesario,
Whom I respect and love 'bove my own life,
Indeed with a kind of dotage, he shall never
Go forth a doors, but the contrary faction
Will indanger's life, and then am I most wretched.
I am thinking of a strange prevention,
Which I shall witness with a bleeding eye,
Fondness sometimes is worse then cruelty. 
HAunted, my house is hinted with goblins. I shall be frighted out of my wits, and set up a sign only to invite carriers and Foot-posts; scar-crows to keep off the Cavalry, and Gentry of the best rank. I will nail up my doors, and wall up my girl (wife) like an Anchoresse; or she will be ravished before our faces, by rascals and cacafugo's (wife) cacafugo's.
These are your In-comes, remember your own proverb, the savour of every gain smelt sweet; thank no???body but your self for this trouble.
No galling (dear Spouse) no galling, every days new vexation abates me two inches in the wast, terrible penance for an Host, Girl, girl, girl, which of all this gally-maufry of mans flesh appears to???lerable to thy choice; speak shortly, and speak truly: I must and will know, must and will; here ye that?
Sir, be not jealous of my care and duty;
I am so far from entertaining thoughts
Of liberty, that much more excellent objects
Then any of such course contents as these are,
Could not betray mine eye to force my heart;
Conceive a wish of any dearer happiness
Then your direction warrants. I am yours sir.
What thinks the man now? is not this strange at 13.
Very good words, ther's a tang in 'em, and a sweet one, tic music (wife) and now I come t'ee. Let us a little examine the several conditions of our Paragraphi???sticall suitors. The first, a travailing Tailor, who by the mystery of his needle and thimble, hath surveyed the fashi???once of the French, and English; this Signior Ginger-bread stitched up in the shreds of a gaudy outside, sows lineings with his cross legedd complement, like an Ape doing tricks over a staff, cringes, and crouches, and kiss???ses his fore-finger.
Out upon him.
A second, a lavolteteere, a saltatory, a dancer with a Kit at his bum, one that by teaching great Madonuas to foot it, has miraculously purchased a ribanded wastcote, and four clean pair of socks; a fellow that skips as hee walks, and instead of sensible discourse vents the curi???os conceit of some new tune stolen from a Mask, or a bawdy ditty elevated for the Pole Arctic of a Ladies chamber, in that fyle stands another of your inamoratoes
Hang him and his fiddle together, hee never fiddles any child of ours.
The third, a Mongrel, got by a Switzer on an Ita???lian, this puppy, being left well estated, comes so Floe???rinse, that the world may take notice, how impossible it is for experience to alter the course of nature, a fool (wife) and indeed a Clown turned gallant, seldom or no???ver proves other then a gallant fool, this toy prates to little purpose other then what's a clock, shall's go drink, de'e forsooth, and thank ye heartily; I fear no art in him to catch thee, and yet wee must bee tormented with this buzzard amongst the rest.
Tic your own folly, forbid him the house.
The 4th, a Mule-driver, a stubborn &amp; a harsh knave: the fifth a School-Master, a very amorous Pedant, run al???most mad with study df Sonnets and Complements out of old play-ends, the last an Advocates clerk, that speaks pure Fustion in Law terms, excellent Courtiers all, and all as neat as a Magnifico's post new painted at his en???trance to an office; thou shalt have none of 'em. Laugh at 'em doe. I say thou shalt have none of 'em.
Still your command to me shall stand a Law.
Now they throng like so many horse-coursers at a fair, in clusters about the man of art, for love powders, ingredients, potions, counsels, postures, complements, philters: the devil and the???how now? tumults? batteries, noise? ha, get from my sight. 
Murder me, do, pound me to Mummy, doe; see what will come on it.
Dog, leave thy snarling, or i'll cut thy tongue out,
Thou unlikt bear, dare thou yet stand my fury,
My generous rage? yet! by the sulpherous damps
That feed the hungry and incessant darkness,
Which curls round the grim Electors back,
Mutter again, and with one powerful word,
Isle call an Host up from the Stygian lakes,
Shall waft thee to the Acherontic fens;
Where choak't with mists as black as thy impostors,
Thou shalt live still a dying.
Conjure me to the devil and you can. I live in hell upon earth 'em already, and you had any mercy, you would not practise upon a kind heart thus.
You have drawn blood from him Signior, Is his offence unpardonable?
A lump of ignorance, pray speak not for him,
A drowsy grossenesse, in all christian kingdoms,
The mention of my art, my name, my practise
Merit and glory hath begot at once
Delight and wonder; isle not be entreated;
Spare intercession for him,????? thou scorn
Of learning, shame of duty; must thy sloth
Draw my just fame in question? I discharge thee
From my service; see me no more henceforth.
Discharge me, is that my years wages!
Isle not be so answered.
Not Camel, sir I am liberal to thee;
Thou hast thy life, begone.
Vengeance, sweet vengeance.
Do'e mumble?
Isle be revenged, monstrously, suddenly, and insa???tiably; my bulk begins to swell.
Homotolenton, Pragmatophoros, Heliostycorax.
Call up your spirits, I defy 'em; well have law for my broken pate, twelve ounces of pure blood; Troy-weight. In despite of thee my Master, and thy Master the grand devil himself, vindicta, vindicta. 
Signior you are exceeding moved.
Mercy upon us, what terrible words thou talked?
A slave, a cur???but be not you affrighted
Young Virgin, it were an injury to sweetness:
Should any rough sound draw from your cheeks,
The precious tincture which makes nature proud
Of her own workmanship.
Wife, Mark, mark that wife.
Shake then your anger off Sir;
You command it
Fair one, mine Host and Hostess, with your leaves
I have a motion jointly to you all.
An honest one I hope.
Well put in wife.
A very necessary one, the Mess
Stools out. And half of suitors, that attend tousher
Their loves sit reverence to your daughter, waite
With one consent, which can best please her eye;
In offering at a dance, I have provided
Music. And twill be something I dare promise
Worthy your laughter, shall they have admittance?
By any means, for I am persuaded the manner will be so
Ridiculous, that it will confirm the assurance of their
Miserable fooleries, but no longer trouble with 'em here,
Then they are in these May-games.
So I am resolved.
Nor any wise word of senseless love.
Not any; I have charmed them, did you see
How they prepared themselves, how they stroke up
Their foretops, how they justly for the Looking-glasse,
To set their Faces by it;
You would look for some most impossible antic. 
So, so, so, so, here flutter the nest of hornets, the hotchpotch of rascality, now, now, now, now, the dung-hill of corruption hath yawnd forth the burden of abho???mination. I am vexed, vexed to the soul, will rid my house of this unchristend fry, and never open my doors again.
Some other time, isle give no answer now,
But have preferred your suits, here show your cunning.
First every one in order do his honour
To the fair mark you shoot at; courtly, courtly,
Convey your several loves in lively measure:
Come, let us take our seats, some sprightly music.
Dance all and part, tic a very necessary farewell.
Well done my lusty bloods, preciously well done,
One lusty rouse of wine, and take leave on all sides.
Thanks for your revels Gentlemen; accept
This Gold, and drink as freely as you danced.
My noble Lord Cesario, clear the rooms sirs.
Away. Attend your answers.
With your favour Rolando, I would change a word or two with your fair daughter.
At your Lordships pleasure, come wife, no mutte???ring, have a care girl, my love, service, and duty to your good Lordship. 
My often visits (sweet Bianca) cannot
But constantly inform thy judgment, wherein
Thy happiness consists, for to steal minutes
From great employments, to converse with beauty,
Lodged in so mean a fortune, to lay by
Consideration of the unequal distance
Between my blood and thine, to shun occasions
Of courtship with the Ladies of the time:
Noble, and fair, only for love to thee,
Must of necessity invite a tenderness;
As low as nature could have stamped a bond women's.
To entertain quick motions of rare gratitude
For my uncommon favours.
Deed my Lord, as far as my simplicity can lead me,
I freely thank your courtesies.
To thank them, is to reward them pretty one.
Then teach me
How I may give them back again; in truth
I never yet received a pair of Gloves:
A trifling ring from any that expected
An equal satisfaction, but as willingly
I parted with the gift unto the owner, as he bestowed it.
But I power before thee
Such plenties, as it lies not in the ability
Of thy whole kindred to return proportionable
One for a thousand.
You my Lord conclude
For my instruction, to engage a debt
Beyond a possibility of payment,
I ever thought a sin; and therefore justly
Without conceit of scorn or curious rudeness,
I must refuse your bounty.
Can thou love?
Love! is there such a word in any language
That carries honest sense?
Never dwelt ignorance
In so sweet-shap't a building, love Bianca,
Is that firm knot which ties two hearts in one,
Shall ours be tied so?
Use a plainer word,
My Lord. Instead of ties, say marries hearts,
Then I may understand.
Their hearts are married
Whose interchange of pleasures and embraces,
Soft kisses, and the privacies of sweets,
Keeps constant league together, when temptation
Of great men's oaths and gifts shall urge contempt,
Rather then batter resolution, novelty
Of sights, or taste of new delights in wantonness,
Breeds surfeit more then appetite in any
Reserved to noble vows; my excellent maid
Live thou but true to me, and my contents,
Mine only, that no partner may partake
The treasure of those sweets thy youth yet glories in
And I will raise thy lowness to abundance
Of all varieties, and more triumph
In such a mistress, then great Princes doting
On truth-betraying wives.
Thus to yield up then
The cottage of my virtue to be swallowed
By some hard-neighboring landlord such as you are
Is in effect to love, a Lord so vicious!
O where shall innocence find some poor dwelling
Free from temptations tirrany.
Nay prithee;
Gay clothes, high feeding, easy beds of lust,
Change of unseemly sights; with base discourse,
Draw curses on your Palaces; for my part
This I will be confirmed in, I will eat
The bread of labour, know no other rest
Then what is earnd from honest pains, ere once more
Lend ear to your wild toils; Sir, would you were
As noble in desires, as I could be in knowing virtue.
Pray doe not afflict a poor soul thus.
I swear.???to me? 
The Duke my Lord commands your speedy presence
For answering agreivances late urged
Against you by your Mother.
By my Mother.
The Court is near on sitting.
I waite on it Sir, 
What wast of blood, what tumults, what divisions,
What outrages, what uprores in a state,
Factions though issuing from mean springs at first
Have (not restraind) flowed to, the sad example
At Rome between the ??rsins and Columns,
Nay here at home in Florence, twixt the Neers
And the Bianchi can too mainly witness.
I sit not at the helm (my Lords) of sovereignty
Deputed Pilot for the Common-wealth,
To sleep whiles others steer (as their wild fancies
Shall council) by the compass of disorders.
Baptist, This short Preface is directed
Chiefly to you, the petty brawls and quarrels
Late urged betwixt the Alberti and your family
Must, yes and shall like tender unknit joints
Fasten again together of themselves:
Or like an angry Surgeon, we will use
The roughness of our justice, to cut off
The stubborn rancour of the limbs offending.
Most gracious Florence.
Our command was signified,
That neither of the followers of each party
Should appear here with weapons.
Tic obeyed Sir, on my side.
We must leave the general cause
Of State employments to give ear to brawls
Of some particular grudges, politic government
For tutored Princes, but no more henceforth.
Our frown shall check presumption, not our clemency,
All blessings due to unpartiall Princes,
Crown Florence with eternity of happiness.
If double prayers can double blessings (great Sir)
Mine join for your prosperity with my mothers.
Rise both; now briefly (Lady) without circumstance
Deliver those agrievances which lately
Your importunity possessed our counsel
Were fit for audience, wherein you petitiond,
You might be heard without an Advocate
Which boon you find is granted.
Though divided.
I stand between the laws of truth and modesty,
Yet let my griefs have vent: Yet the clearness
Of strange necessity requires obedience
To nature and your mercy, in my weeds
Of mourning, emblems of too deer misfortunes,
Badges of griefs, and Widowhood, the burden
Of my charged soul must be laid down before you;
Wherein if strict opinion cancel shame,
My frailty is my plea;
Stand forth young man,
And hear a story that will strike all reason
Into amazement.
I attend.
Alberto (peace dwell upon his ashes) still the hus???band
Of my remembrance and unchanging vows,
Has by his death left to his heir possession
Of fair revenue, which this young man claims
As his inheritance. I urged him gently,
Friendly, and privately to grant a portage
Of this estate to her who owns it all
This his supposed Sister.
How supposed?
Pray Madam recollect your self.
The relish
Of a strange truth begins to work like Physic
Already: I have bitterness to mingle
With these preparatives, so deadly loathsome;
It will quite choke digestion; shortly hear it
Cesario, for I dare not rob unjustly
The poor soul of his name; this, this Cesario
Neither for Father had Alberto, me
For Mother, nor Clarissa for his Sister.
Mother, ?? Mother.
I am in a Dream sure.
No interruptions. Lady on,
How ever
A Faulkners son:
Mistake not
Great Duke of Tuscany or the beginning
Or process of this novelty; my husband
The now deceased Alberto, from his youth
In-urd to an impatience, and roughness
Of disposition, when not many months
After our marriage were worn out, repined
At the unfruitful barrenness of youth,
Which as he pleased to term it, cut our hops off
From blessing of some issue, to prevent it;
I grew ambitious of no fairer honour
Then to preserve her love, and as occasions
Still called him from me, studied in his absence
How I might frame his welcome home with comfort.
At last I faynd my self with child; the Message
Of freedom or relief to one half starved
In prison is not uttered with such greediness;
Of expectation and delight as this was
To my much affected Lord, his care, his goodness;
(Pardon me that I use the word) exceeded
All former fears, the hour of my deliverance
As I pretended drawing nee'r, I fashiond
My birth-rights at a Country Garden house,
Where then my Faulkners wife was brought a bed
Of this Cesario; him I ownd for mine;
Presented him unto a joyful Father.
Can you prove this true?
Proofs I have most evident;
But O the curse of my impatience; shortly
Ere three new Moons had spent their borrowed lights,
I grew with child indeed, so just is Heaven,
The issue of which burden was this daughter;
Judge now most gracious Prince my Lords and you,
What combats then and since I have endured
Between a mothers piety and weakness
Of a Soul trembling wife; to have revealed
This secret to Alberto, had bin danger
Of ruin to my fame, besides the conflict
Of his distractions; now to have suppressed it,
Were to defeat my child, my only child,
Of her most lawful honours, and inheritance.
Caesario, you are a man still, Education
Hath moulded thee a Gentleman, continue so;
Let not this fall from greatness, sink thee lower
Then worthy thoughts may warrant, yet disclaim
All interest in Albertos blood, thou hast not
One drop of his or mine.
Produce your witness.
The Falconers wife his mother,
And such women as waited then upon me,
Sworn to the privacy of this great secret.
Give them all their oaths.
O let me crave forbearance, gracious Sir,
Vouchsafe me hearing.
Speak Caesario.
Thus long
I have stood silent, and with no unwillingness,
Attended the relation of my fall,
From a fair expectation; what I feared
(Sinc the first syllable this Lady uttered
Of my not being hers) benevolent Fates
Have eased me off; for to be basely born,
If not base-born, detracts not from the bounty
Of natures freedom or an honest birth.
Nobility claimed by the right of blood,
Sh???was chiefly that our Ancestors desired
What we inherit; but that man whose actions
Purchase a real merit to himself,
And ranks him in the file of of praise and honour,
Creates his own advancement; let me want
The fuel which best feeds the fires of greatness,
Lordly possessions, yet shall still my gratitude
By some attempts of mention not unworthy
Endeavour to return a fit acquittance
To that large debt I owe your favours (Madam)
And great Alberto's memory and goodness;
O that I could as gently shake off passion
For the loss of what great brave man as I can shake off
Remembrance of that once I was reputed;
I have not much to say, this Princely presence
Needs not too strictly to examine farther
The truth of this acknowledgment; a mother
Dares never disavow her only son,
And any woman must come short of Piety,
That can or dis-inherit her own issue,
Or fears the voice of rumour for a stranger.
Madam, you have confessed, my Father was
A servant to your Lord and you: by interest
Of being his son, I cannot but claim justly
The honour of continuing still my service
To you and yours; which granted, I beg leave
I may for this time be dismissed.
Bold spirit.
I love thee now with pity;
Go not yet???
A sudden tempest that might shake a rock,
Yet he stands firm against it; much it moves me,
He not Alberto's son, and she a widow,
And she a widow,??? Lords your ear.
Your pleasure.??? 
So, Lady, what you heard avouched is truth.
Truth only, gracious Sir.
Hear then our Sentence.
Since from his cradle you have fed and fostered
Caesario as your son, and trained him up
To hopes of greatness; which now in a moment
You utterly again have ruined, this way
We with our Council are resolved, you being
A widow shall accept him for a husband.
Husband to me Sir?
It is in us to raise him
To honours, and his virtues will deserve 'em.
But Sir, it is in no Prince nor his preogative,
To force a women's choice against her heart.
True, if then you appeal to higher justice,
Our doom includes this clause upon refusal
Out of your Lords revenues shall Caesario
Assure to any whom he takes for wife
The inheritance of three parts; the less remainer
Is dowry large enough to marry a daughter;
And we by our prerogative which you question
Will publicly adopt him into'th name
Of your deceased Alberto, that the memory
Of so approved a Peer may live in him
That can preserve his memory less you find out
Some other means which may as amply satisfy
His wrong, our Sentence stands irrevocable:
What think you Lords?
The Duke is just and honourable.
Let me embrace Caesario, henceforth ever
I vow a constant friendship.
I remit all former difference.
I am too poor
In words to thank this Justice. Madam always
My studies shall be love to you, and duty.
Duke Replies we admit none. Caesario waite on us.
Mentivole.
My Lord.
Look on Clarissa, shoe's noble, rich, young, fair.
My Lord, and virtuous.
Mentivole and virtuous.???Madam.
Tyranny of justice, I shall live reports derision,
That am compelled to exchange a graceful widowhood
For a continual Martyrdom in marriage,
With one so much beneath me.
I'll plead for ye
Boldly and constantly, let you??? daughter only
Admit my son her servant, at next visit
Madam isle be a messenger of comfort.
Mentivole, be confident and earnest. 
Married again, to him too! better it had been
The young man should have still retained the honours
Of old Albertos son, then I the shame
Of making him successor of his bed; I was too blame,
Indeed without offence,
Madame I think you were,
You urge it fairly, and like a worthy friend.
can you say any thing
In commendation of a Mushroom withered
As soon as started up?
You scorn an Innocent
Of noble growth, for whiles your husband lived
I have heard you boast Cesario in all actions
Gave matter of report of Imitation,
Wonder and envy; let not discontinuance
Of some few days estrange a sweet opinion
Of virtue, chiefly when in such extremity,
Your pity not contempt will argue goodness.
O Sir,
If you would use a thriving courtship,
You cannot utter a more powerful language
That I shall listen to with greater greediness
Then th'argument you prosecute; this speaks you
A man complete and excellent;
I speak not, they are his own deserts.
Good Sir forbear,
I am now fully sensible of running
Into a violent Lethargy, whose deadliness
Locks up all reason, I shall never henceforth
Remember my past happiness.
These clouds may be dispersed,
I fear continual night
Will over-shroud me, yet poor youth his trespass
Lies in his fortune, not the cruelty
Of the Dukes sentence.
I dare think it does,
If all fail I will learn thee to conquer
Adversity with sufferance.
You resolve Nobly. 
Let any friend have entrance,
Sir a'shall.
Any, I except none,
Wee know, your mind Sir 
Pleasures admit no bounds.
I am pitched so high
To such a growth of full prosperities
That to conceal my fortunes were an injury?
To gratfulnesse and those more liberal favours
By whom my glories prosper. He that flows
In gracious and swollen tides of best abundance,
Yet will be Ignorant of his own fortunes,
Deserves to live contemned, and dye forgotten;
The harvest of my hopes is now already
Ripened and gathered, I can fatten youth
With choice of plenty, and supplies of comforts,
My fate springs in my own hand, and Isle use it.
Tic my place,
Yours here fair one, Isle acquaint my Lord,
He's here, go to him boldly.
Please you to let him understand how readily
I waited on your errand?
Saucy fellow, you must excuse his breeding,
Whats the matter
Biancha, my Biancha, to your offices. 
This visit (Sweet) from thee (my pretty dear)
By how much more it was unexpected, comes
So much the more timely: witness this free welcome,
What ere occasion led thee?
You may gusse Sir,
Yet indeed tic a rare one,
Prithee speak it, my honest virtuous maid,
Sir I have heard
Of your misfortune, and I cannot tell you
Whether I have more cause of joy or sadness,
To know they are a truth.
What truth Bianca! misfortunes, how, wherein?
You are disclaimed
For being the Lord Albertos son, and publicly
Acknowledged of as mean a birth as mine is,
It cannot choose but grieve thee
Grieve me, ha ha ha ha? is this all?
This all.
Thou art sorry for it
I warrant thee, alas good soul, Biancha,
That which thou call misfortune is my happiness,
my happiness Biancha.
If you love me, it may prove mine too,
May it, I will love thee.
My good good maid,
If that can make thee happy,
Better and better love thee,
Without breach then
Of modesty I come to claim the Interest
Your protestations both by vows and letters
Have made me owner of, from the first hour
I saw you, I confess I wished J had been
Or not so much below your rank and greatness,
Or not so much above those humble flames
That should have warmed my bosom with a temperate
Equality of desires in equal fortunes.
Still as you uttered Language of affection,
I courted time to pass more slowly on
That I might turn more food to lend attention
To what I durst not credit nor yet hope for:
Yet still as more I heard, I wished to hear more,
Did thou in truth wench
Willingly betrayed
My self to hopeless bondage.
A good girl,
I thought I should not miss
What ear thy answer was.
But as I am a maid Sir, and I'faith
You may believe me, for I am a maid,
So dearly I respected both your fame
And quality, that I would first have perished
In my sick thoughts then ere have given consent
To have undone your fortunes by inviting
A marriage with so mean a one as I am,
I should have dyed sure, and no creature known
The sickness that had killed me.
Pretty heart, good soul, alas. alas.
Now since I know
There is no difference twixt your birth and mine.
Not much twixt our estates, if any bee,
The advantage is on my side, I come willingly
To tender you the first fruits of my heart,
And am content t'accept you for my husband,
Now when you are at lowest.
For a husband?
Speak sadly, dost thou mean so?
In good deed Sir,
Tic pure love makes this proffer.
I believe thee,
What counsel urged thee on, tell me, thy Father
My worshipful smug Host? wast not he wench?
Or mother Hostess? ha?
Do ye mock my parentage?
I doe not scorn yours.
Mean folks are as worthy
To be well spoken of if they deserve well,
As some whose only fame lies in their blood.
O you're a proud poor man: all your oaths falsehood,
your vow deceit, your letters forged, and wicked.
You would be my wife. J dare swear,
Had your heart,
Your hand and tongue been twins, you had reputed
This courtesy a benefit,
Simplicity,
How prettily thou move me? why Biancha
Report has cozned thee, I am not fallen
From my expected honours, or possessions.
Though from the hope of birthright.
Are you not?
Then I am lost again, I have a suit too;
You'll grant it if you be a good man.
Any thing,
Pray doe not talk of ought what I have said tee.
As I wish health I will not.
Pity me, but never love me more.
Nay now you're cruel,
Why all these tears????Thou shalt not go.
Isle pray for ye
That you may have a virtuous wife, a fair one,
And when I am dead???
Fie, fie,
Think on me sometimes,
With mercy so this trespass.
Let us kiss
At parting as at coming.
This I have
As a free dower to a virgins grave,
All goodness dwell with ye. 
Harmless Biancha? unskild,
What handsome toys are maids to play with?
How innocent. but I have other thoughts
Of nobler meditation.???my felicity,
Thou comes as I could wish, lend me a lip
Soft, as melting as when old Alberto
After his first nights trial taking farewell
Of thy youths conquest tasted.
You are uncivil.
I will be Lord of my own pleasures, Madame
You're mine, mine freely,
Come, no whimpering henceforth
New con the lessons of loves best experienced,
That our delights may meet in equal measure
Of resolutions and desires; this sullenness
Is scurvy, I like it not,
Be modest.
And doe not learn Cesario how to prostitute
The riot of thy hopes to common folly;
Take a sad women's word, how ere thou doatest
Upon the present graces of thy greatness,
Yet I am not fallen so below my constancy
To virtue, nor the care which I once tendered
For thy behoof that I prefer a sentence
Of cruelty before my honour.
Honour!
Hear me, thou see this girl! now the comfort
Of my last days. She is the only pledge
Of a bed truly noble, she had a father
(I need not speak him more then thou remember)
Whom to dishonour by a meaner choice,
Were injury and infamy,
to goodness,
To time and virtuous mention.
I have vowed,
Observe me now Cseario, that how ere
I may be forced to marry, yet no tyranny,
Persuasions, flattery, gifts, entreats, or tortures,
Shall draw me to a second bed.
Tic Just too
Yes and tic Just Clarissa. I allow
The Dukes late sentence, am resolved young man
To be thy wife, but when the ceremony
Of marriage is performed, in life I will bee
Though not in name a widow.
Pray a word Tee,
Shall I in earnest never be your bedfellow?
Never, ?? never; and tic for your good too.
Prove that.
Alas too many years are numbered
In my account to entertain the benefit
Which youth in thee Cesario and ability
Might hope for and require, it were Injustice
To rob a gentleman deserving memory
Of Issue to preserve it.
No more herein,
You are an excellent pattern of true piety,
Let me now turn your advocate. Pray look into
The order of the Duke, Jnjoynd, admit
J satisfy the sentence without marriage
with you, how then?
Cesario.
If I know
How to acquit your fears, yet keep th'injunction
In every clause whole and entire, your charity
Will call me still your servant.
Still my son.
Right Madam, now you have it, still your son.
The Genius of your blessings hath instructed
Your tongue oraculously, wee will forget
How once I and Clarissa enterchangd
The ties of brother and of sister, henceforth
New stile us man and wife.
By what authority
Heavens great appointment, yet in all my dotage
On thy perfections, when I thought Clarissa
Wee had been pledges of one womb, no loose
No wanton heat of youth, desired to claim
Priority in thy affections, other
Then nature might commend. Chastely I tendered
Thy farewell as a brother ought; but since
Our bloods are strangers, let our hearts contract
A long life-lasting unity, for this way
The sentence is to be observed or no way.
Then no way.
I expected other answer Madam from you.
No, every age shall curse me,
The monster, and the prodigy of nature,
Horrors beyond extremity,
Pray mother confine the violence of grief
Yes mother, pray do.
Thus some catch at a matrons honour
By flying lust to plot Incestuous witchcrafts,
More terrible then whoredoms; cruel mercy
When to preserve the body from a death
The soul is strangled.
This is more then passion.
It comes near to distraction.
I am quieted.
Cesario, thou majesty tell the Duke securely
Albertos titles, honours and revenues,
The Duke may give away, Enjoy them thou.
Clarissas birthright, Marianas dower
Thou shalt be Lord of; turn us to the world
Unpitied and unfreinded, yet my bed
Thou never sleep in; as for her; she hears me,
If she as much as in a thoughts consent;
That thou may call her wife, a Mothers curse
Shall never leave her.
As a brother once
I loved you, as a noble friend yet honour ye,
But for a husband sir, I dare not own you,
My faith is given already.
To a Villain, Isle cut his throat.
Why this is more then passion?
It comes near a distraction.
Call to mind Sir.
How much you have abated of that goodness
Which once reigned in ye, they appeared so lovely
That such as friendship led to observation
Courted the great example.
Left and flatterd into abroad derision
Why dee think so?
My Lord Baptist, is your son grown cold
In hasting on the marriage, which his vows
Have sealed to my wronged daughter?
Wee come Lady, to consummate the contract.
With Mentivole? is he the man?
Clarissas, troth and mine,
Cesario are recorded in a character
So plain and certain, that except the hand
Of heaven, which writ it first, would blot it out again,
No human power can raze it.
But say you so too? young Lady,
I should else betray
My heart to falsehood, and my tongue to perjury.
Madam, you know the sentence.
From the Duke,
I have particular comforts which require
A private ear.
I shall approve it gladly,
Wee are resolved Cesario.
Be not insolent upon a Princes favour.
Loose no glory,
Your younger years have purchased.
And deserved too you've many worthy friends.
Preserve and use them. 
Good, very good, why here is a complement
Of mirth in desperation, I could curse
My fate. ?? with what speed men tumble down
From hopes that soar to high. Biancha now
May scorn me justly too, Clarissa married,
Albertos widow resolute, Biancha
Refused, and I forsaken, let me study,
I can but dye a Bachelor thats the worst on it. 
Come Gentlemen,
This is the day that our great artist hath
Promised to give all your several suites satisfaction.
Is he stirring?
He hath been at his book these two hours.
Hes a rare Physician.
Why Isle tell you,
Were Paracelsus the German now
Living, heed take up his single rapier against his
Terrible long sword, he makes it a matter of nothing
To cure the gout, sore eyes he takes out as familiarly,
Washes them, and puts them in again,
As you'd blanch almonds.
They say he can make gold.
I, I, he learnt it of Kelly in Germany.
Theres not a Chemist
In christendom can go beyond him for multiplying.
Take heed then,
He get not up your daughters belly my Host.
You are a merry Gentleman
And the man of art will love you the better.
Does he love mirth and crotchets?
O hes the most courteous Physician,
You may drink or drab in's company freely,
The better he knows how your disease grows,
The better he knows how to cure it.
But I wonder my Host
He has no more resort of Ladies to him.
Why Sir?
O divers of them have great belief in conjurers
Lechery is a great help to the quality.
Hoe's scarce known to be in town yet,
Ere long we shall have em come
hurrying hither in Fetherbeds.
How? bedridden.
No sir, in fetherbeds that move upon 4 wheels in Spanish caroches.
Pray acquaint him we give attendance.
I shall gentlemen. I would fine be rid
Of these rascals, but that they raise profit
To my wine-seller;
When I have made use of them sufficiently,
I will entreat the conjurer to tie crackers to their tails,
And send them packing.
Come hither mine Host look here.
Whats that?
A challenge from my man.
For breakings pate?
He writes here if I meet him not
Ith Field within this half hour,
I shall hear more from him.
O sir, mind your profit,
Ne'er think of the rascal, here are the gentlemen.
Morrow my worthy clients,
What are you all prepared of your questions?
That I may give my resolution upon them,
We are sir.
And have brought our money.
Each then in order,
And differ not for precedence.
I am buying of an office sir,
And to that purpose I would fine learn
to dissemble cunningly.
Doe you come to me for that? you should rather
Have gone to a cunning woman.
I sir but their Instructions are but like women,
Pretty well but not to the depth, as I'do have it,
You are a conjurer, the devils master,
And I would learn it from you so exactly,
That the devil himself
Might not go beyond you,
You are ith right sir.
And so your money for your purchase
Might come in again within a 12 month.
I would be a Graduate sir, no freshman.
Here is my hand sir,
I will make you dissemble so methodically,
As if the devil should be sent from the great Turk,
In the shape of an Ambassador
To set all the christian princes at variance.
I cannot with any modesty desire any more,
Theres your money sir,
For the art of dissembling.
My suite sir will be news to you when I tell it,
Pray on.
I would set up a press here in Italy,
To write all the Caranta for Christendom.
Thats news indeed,
And how would you employ me in it?
Marry sir, from you
I would gain my intelligence.
I conceive you, you would have me furnish you
With a spirit to inform you.
But as quiet a Devil as the woman,
The first day and a half after she's married,
I can by no means endure a terrible one.
No, no, Isle qualify him,
He shall not fright you,
It shall be the ghost of some lying Stationer,
A Spirit shall look as if butter would not melt in his mouth, A new Mercurius Gallobelgicus.
O there was a captain was rare at it,
Ne'er think of him,
Though that captain writ a full hand gallop,
And wasted indeed more harmless paper then
Ever did laxative Physic,
Yet will I make you to out-scribble him,
And set down what you please,
The world shall better believe you.
Worthy sir I thank you, there's money.
A new office
For writing pragmaticall Curranto's
I am a schoolmaster sir,
And would fine confer with you
About erecting 4 new sects of religion at Amsterdam.
What the Devil should
New sects of religion doe there?
I assure you I would get
A great deal of money by it.
And what are the 4 new sects
Of religion you would plant there?
Why thats it I come about sir,
Tic a Devil of your raising must invent 'em,
I confess I am too weak to compass it.
So sir, then you make it a matter of no difficulty
To have them tolerated.
Trouble not your self for that,
Let but your Devil set them a foot once,
I have Weavers, and Ginger-bread makers,
And mighty Aquavitae-men, shall set them a going.
This is somewhat difficult,
And will ask some conference with the devil.
Take your own leisure sir,
I have another business too, because I mean
To leave Jtaly, and bury my self in those nether parts
Of the low countries.
Whats that sir.
Marry I would fine make 9 days to the week, for the more ample benefit of the captain.
You have a shrewd pate sir.
But how this might be compasd?
Compasd easily; tic but making
A new Almanac, and dividing the compass
Of the year into larger penny-worths,
As a Chandler with his compass makes
A Geometric proportion of the Holland cheese
He retails by stivers.
But for getting of it licenced.
Trouble not your self with that sir,
Theres your money,
For four new sects of religions,
And 9 days to the week.
To be brought in at general pay-dayes,
Write I beseech you.
At general pay-dayes.
I am by profession a taylor,
You have heard of me.
Yes sir, and will not steal from you
The least part of that commendation I have heard utterd.
I take measure of your worth sir,
And because I will not afflict you with any large bill
Of circumstances, I will snip off particulars.
I would fine invent some strange
And exquisite new fashions.
Are you not travelled sir.
Yes sir, but have observed all we can see
Or invent are but old ones with new names to'em,
Now I would some way or other grow more curious.
Let me see to devise new fashions.
Were you never in the Moon?
In the Moon tavern! yes sir: often.
No, I do mean in the new world,
In the world thats in the Moon yonder.
How? a new world ith moon?
Yes I assure you.
And peopled?
O most fantastically peopled.
Nay certain then ther's work for taylors?
That there is I assure you.
Yet I have talked with a Scotch taylor
That never discovered so much to me,
Though he has travailed far, and was a peddler in Poland.
That was out of his way,
This lies beyond China,
You would study new fashions you say?
Take my council, make a voyage,
And discover that new world.
Shall I be a moon-man?
I am of opinion, the people of that world
(If they be like the nature of that climate they live in)
Do vary the fashion of their clothes oftner then any
Quick-silver'd nation in Europe.
Not unlikely, but what should that be we call
The man in the moon then?
Why tic nothing but an Englishman
That stands there stark naked,
With a pair of sheires in one hand,
And a great bundle of broad cloth in the other
(Which resembles the bush of thorns)
Cutting out of new fashions.
I have heard somewhat like this,
But how shall I get thither?
Isle make a new compass shall direct you.
Certain?
Count me else for no man of direction.
Theres 20 ducats in hand, at my return
Isle give you a 100.
A new voyage to discover new fashions.
I have been a travailer too sir,
That have showed strange beasts in Christendom,
And got money by them, but I find the trade to decay.
Your Chameleon, or East-Indian hedgehog
Gets very little money, and your Elephant devours
So much bread, brings in so little profit,
His keeper were better every morning
Cram 15 Taylors with white manchet,
I would have some new spectacle,
And one that might be more attractive.
Let me see, were you ever in Spain?
Not yet Sir.
I would have you go to Madrill, and against some great festival, when the court lies there, provide a great and spacious Engilsh Ox, and rode him whole, with a pudding in's belly; that would be the eight won???der of the world in those parts I assure you.
A rare project without question.
Go beyond all their garlic whole Podrithoes, though you sod one in Garquentuas cauldron, bring in more money, then all the monsters of Africa.
Good Sir do your best for him; he's of my ac???quaintance, and one if ye knew him???
What is he?
He was once a man of infinite letters.
A Scholar?
No sir, a packet carrier, which is always a man of many letters, yon know: then he was Mule-driver, now hoe's a gentleman, and feeds monsters.
A most ungrateful calling.
Ther's money for your direction; the price of the Ox Sir.
A hundred French crowns, for it must be a Lin???colne shire Ox, and a prime one:
For a rare and monstrous spectacle, to be seen at Madrill.
Pray forbear sir, we shall have a new quarrel.
You durst not meet me in the field, I am therefore come to spoil your market.
Whats the news with you sir.
Gentlemen, you that come hither to be most abominably cheated, listen, and be as wise as your plan???net will suffer you, keep your money, be not gulled, be not laughed at.
What means this? would I had my money a???gain in my pocket.
The fellow is full of malice, do not mind him.
This professed cheating rogue was my master, and I confess my self a more preternotorious rogue then himself, in so long keeping his villainous counsel.
Come, come, I will not hear you.
No couzner, thou would not hear me, I do but dare thee to suffer me to speak, and then thou and all thy devils spit fire, and spout Aqua fortis.
Speak on, I freely permit thee.
Why then know all you simple animals, you whose purses are ready to cast the calfe, if they have not cast it already, if you give any credit this juggling rascal, you are worse then simple widgins, and will be drawn into the net by this decoy duck, this tame cheater.
Ha, ha, ha, pray mark him.
He does profess Physic, and conjuring; for his Physic; he has but two medicines for all manner of diseases; when he was in the low countries, he used no???thing but butterd beer, coloured with Elegant, for all kind of maladies, and that he called his catholic med???cine; sure the ducth smelt out it was butterd beer, else they would never have endured it for the names sake: then does he minister a grated dogs turd instead of Rubarbe, many times of Unicorns horn, which working strong???lie with the conceit of the Patient, would make them be???scummer to the height of a mighty purgation.
The rogue has studied this invective.
Now for his conjuring, the witches of Lapland are the devils chaire-women to him, for they will sell a man a wind to some purpose; he sells wind, and tells you forty lies over and over.
I thought what we should find of him.
Hold your prating, be not you an heretic.
Conjure! Isle tell you, all the devils names he calls upon, are but fustian names, gatherd out of welch heraldry; in brief, he is a rogue of six reprieves, four pardons of course, thrice pilloried, twins sung Lacry???mae to the Virginals of a carts tail, he has five times been in the Galleys, and will never truly run himself out of breath, till he comes to the gallows.
You have heard worthy gentlemen, what this lying detracting rascal has vomited.
Yes certain, but we have a better trust in you, for you have taine our money.
I have so, truth is he was my servant, and for some chastisement I gave him, he does practise thus upon me; speak truly sir, are you certain I cannot conjure?
Conjure! ha, ha, ha.
Nay, nay, but be very sure of it.
Sure of it? why Isle make a bargain with thee, before all these gentlemen, use all thy art, all thy roguery, and make me do any thing before al this company I have not a mind to, Isle first give thee leave to claim me for thy bond slave, and when thou hast done hang me.
Tic a match, sir, Isle make you caper in the air presently.
I have too solid a body, and my belief is like a Puritans on Good-Friday, too high fed with capon.
I will first send thee to Greek land for a haunch of venison, just of the thickness of thine own tallow.
Ha, ha, ha, Isle not stir an inch for thee.
Thence to Amboyna in the East-Jndies, for pepper to bake it.
To Amboyna? so I might be pepperd.
Then will I convey thee strark naked to Develing to beg a pair of brogs, to hide thy mountainous buttocks.
And no doublet to 'em?
No sir, I intend to send you of a sleeveless er???rand; but before you vanish, in regard you say I cannot conjure, and are so stupid, and opinionated a slave, that nei???there I, nor my art can compel you to do any thing thats beyond your own pleasure, the gentlemen shall have some sport; you cannot endure a cat sir?
Whats that to thee Juggler?
Nor you'll do nothing at my entreaty?
Isle be hanged first.
Sit Gentlemen, and whatsoever you see, be not frighted;
Alas I can endure no conjuring.
Stir not wife.
Pray let me go sir, I am not fit for these fooleries.
Move not daughter.
I will make you dance a new dance called leap-frog.
Ha, ha, ha.
And as naked as a frog.
Ha, ha, ha, I defy thee.
Spirits of the water in the likeness of frogs.
Tay: he has fished fair believe me.
See, see, he sweats and trembles.
Are you come to your quavers?
Oh, oh, oh.
Isle make you run division on that o's ere I leave you; look you, here are the playfellowes that are so in???deerd to you; come sir, first unease, and then dance, nay Isle make him dance stark naked.
Oh let him have his shirt on, and his Mogols breeches, here are women in the house.
Well for their sakes he shall.
He dances, what a lying rogue was this to say the gentleman could not conjure?
He does prettily well, but tic voluntary, I assure you, I have no hand in it.
As you are a Conjurer, and a rare Artist, free me from these couplets; of all creatures I cannot endure a Frog.
But your dancing is voluntary, I can compel you to nothing.
O me, danghter, lets take heed of this fellow, he'll make us dance naked, and we vex him.
Now cut capers sir, Isle plague that chin of yours.
Oh, oh, oh, my kidneys are roasted, I drop away like a pound of butter roasted.
He will dance himself to death.
No matter Isle sell his fat to the Apothecaries, and repair my injury that way.
Enough in conscience.
Well, at your entreaty vanish. And now I will only make him break his neck in doing a sommerset, and thats all the revenge I mean to take of him.
O gentlemen, what a rogue was I to belie so an approved Master in the noble datk science? you can wit???ness, this I did only to spoil his practise and deprive you of the happiness of enjoying his worthy labours; rogue that I was to do it, pray sir forgive me.
With what face can thou ask it?
With such a face as I deserve, with a hanging look, as all here can testify.
Well gentlemen, that you may perceive the good???nes of my temper, I will entertain this rogue again in hope of amendment, for should I turn him off, he would be hanged.
You may read that in this foul copy.
Only with this promise, you shall never cozen any of my patients.
Never.
And remember hence forward, that though I cannot conjure, I can make you dance sir, go get your self into the cottage again. 
I will never more dance leap Frog: now I have got you into credit, hold it up, and cozen them in abundance.
Oh rare rascal 
How now, a Frankford mart here, a Mount???bank, and his worshipful auditory.
They are my ghuests Sir.
A???upon them, show your juggling tricks in some other room.
And why not here Sir?
Hence, or sir I shall spoil your figure fling???ing, and all their radical questions.
Sir we vanish. 
Signior Caesario, you make bold with me,
And somewhat I must tell you to a degree
of ill manners, they are my ghuests, and men I live by,
And I would know by what authority
You command thus far.
By my interest in your daughter.
Interest do you call it? as J remember I never put her out to Usury on that condition.
Pray thee be not angry.
I am come to make thee happy, and her happy:
Shoe's here; alas my pretty soul, I am come
To give assurance thats beyond thy hope,
Or thy belief, I bring repentance about me,
And satisfaction, I will marry thee.
Ha?
As I live I will, but do not entertain't
With too quick an apprehension of joy,
For that may hurt thee, I have heard some dye of't,
Do not fear me.
Then thou think I feign
This protestation, I will instantly
Before this testimony, my new alliance,
Contract my self unto thee, then I hope
We may be more private.
But thou shalt not sir,
For so has many a maiden-head been lost, and many a bastard gotten,
Then to give you the best of any assurance in the world,
Entreat thy father to go fetch a Priest
Wee will instantly to bed, and there be married.
Pride hath not yet fosaken you I see,
Though prosperity has.
Sir you are too confident
To fashion to your self a dream of purchase
When you are a beggar,
you are bold with me.
Doe we not know your value is cried down
Fourscore in the hundred.
Oh sir I did love you
With such a fixed heart, that in that minute
Wherein you slighted, or contemned me rather,
I took a vow to obey your last decree,
And never more look up at any hope
Should bring me comfort that way, and though since
Your Foster-mother, and the fair Clarissa
Have in the way of marriage despised you,
That hath not any way bred my revenge,
But compassion rather. I have found
So much sorrow in the way to a chaste wedlock
That here I will set down, and never wish
To come to'th journeys end. Your suite to me
Henceforth be ever silenced.
My Bianca.
Henceforward pray forbear her and my house:
She's a poor virtuous wench, yet her estate
May weigh with yours in a gold balance.
Yes, and her birth in any Heralds office in Christendom.
It may prove so:
When you'll say, you have leapt a Whiteing. 
How far am I grown behind hand with fortune?
Here's Cesario???
My son sir is to morrow to be married
Unto the fair Clarissa,
So.
Wee hope you'll be a guest there?
No I will not grace your triumph so much.
I will not tax your breeding.
But it alters not your birth sir, fare you well.
Oh sir doe not grieve him,
He has to much affliction already. 
Every way scorned and lost,
Shame follow you
For I am grown most miserable.
Sir doe you know a Ladies son in town here
They cal Cesario?
Ther's none such I assure thee;
I was told you were the man.
Whats that to thee?
A???on it. You are melancholy, will you drink Sir?
With whom?
With me Sir; despise not this pitched Canvas; the time was wee have known them lined with Spanish Ducats: I have news for you:
For me!
Not unless you'll drink;
We are like our Sea provision, once out of pickle,
We require abundance of drink; I have news to tell you
That were you Prince,
Would make you send your mandate
To have a thousand bonfires made 'ith City,
And pissed out again with nothing but Greek wine.
Come, I will drink with thee howsoever,
And upon these terms I will utter my mind to you. 
SHall we bring your necessaries ashore my Lord?
Do what you please, I am land-sicke, worse by far
Then ere I was at sea.
Collect your self
O my most worthy Prospero, my best friend,
The noble favour I received from thee
In freeing me from the Turks I now account
Worse than my death; for I shall never live
To make requital; what doe you attend for?
To understand your pleasure.
They doe mock me;
I doe protest I have no kind of pleasure
In any thing in the world, butin thy friendship,
I must ever except that.
Pray leave him, leave him. 
The news I heard related since my landing
Of the division of my Family,
How is it possible for any man
To bear't with a set patience?
You have suffered
Since your imprisonment more weighty sorrows.
I, then I was a man of flesh and blood,
Now I am made up of fire, to the full height
Of a deadly Calenture; ?? these wild women
That are so ill preservers of men's honours,
They cannot govern their own honesties.
That I should thirty and odd winters feed
My expectation of a noble heir,
And by a women's falsehood find him now
A fiction, a mere dream of what he was;
And yet I love him still.
In my opinion
The sentence (on this trial) from the Duke
Was noble, to repair Cesarios loss
With the marriage of your wife, had you been dead.
By your favour but it was not, I conceive
T'was disparagment to my name, to have my widow
Match with a Faulkners son, and yet believe it
I love the youth still, and much pity him.
I doe remember at my going to Sea,
Upon a quarrel, and a hurt received
From young Mentivole, my rage so far
Oretopt my nobler temper, I gave charge
To have his hand cut off, which since I heard,
And to my comfort, brave Caesario,
Worthily prevented.
And it was nobly done.
Yet the revenge, for this intent of min???
Hath bred much slaughter in our families,
And yet my wife (which infinitely moans me)
Intends to marry my sole heir Clarissa
To the head branch of the other faction.
Tic the mean to work reconcilement.
Between whom?
Your self, and the worthy Baptist.
Never.
O you have been of a noble and remarkable friend???ship,
And by this match tic generally in Florence
Hoped, twill fully be reconcild; to me
It would be absolute content.
And to my self, I have maine interest in it.
Noble Sir, you may command my heart to break for you
But never to bend that way; poor Caesario
When thou puft'st on thy mournful willow garland,
Thy enemy shall be suited (I do vow)
In the same livery, my Caesario
Loved as my foster child, though not my son,
Which in some countries formerly were barbarous,
Was a name held most affectionate; thou art lost,
Unfortunate young man, not only slighted
Where thou received thy breeding, but since scorned
In the way of marriage, by the poor Bianca
The In-keepers daughter.
I have heard of that too;
But let not that afflict you; for this Lady
May happily deliver at more leisure
A circumstance may draw a fair event,
Better then you can hope for.
For this present we must leave you,
And shall visit you again within these two hours.
Ever to me most welcome,???O my Caesario.
I am none of yours Sir, so tic protested;
And I humbly beg,
Since tic not in your power to preserve me
Any longer in a noble course of life,
Give me a worthy death.
The youth is mad.
Nay Sir, I will instruct you in a way
To kill me honourably.
That were most strange.
I am turning Pirate, You may be employed
By the Duke to fetch me in; and in a sea-fight
Give me a noble grave.
Questionless he's mad; I would give any Doctor
A thousand crowns to free him from this sorrow.
Here's the Physician. 
Hold Sir, I did say
To free you from the sorrow, not from life.
Why life and sorrow are inseparable.
Be comforted Caesario, Mentivole
Shall not marry Clarissa.
No Sir, ere he shall, Isle kill him.
But you forfeit your own life then.
Thats worth nothing.
Caesario, be thy self, be mine Caesario,
Make not thy self incapable of that portion
I have full purpose to confer upon thee;
By falling into madness, bear thy wrongs
With noble patience, the afflicted friend
Which ever in all actions crowns the end.
You well awake me??? nay recovered me
Both to sense and full life, ?? most noble sir,
Though I have lost my fortune, and lost you
For a worthy Father: yet I will not loose
My former virtue, my integrity
Shall not yet forsake me; but as the wilde Ivy,
Spredds and thrives better in some piteous ruin
Of tower, or defaced Temple, then it does
Planted by a new building so shall I
Make my adversity my instrument
To wind me up into a full content.
Tic worthily resolved; our first adventure
Is to stop the marriage; for thy other losses,
Practised by a women's malice, but account them
Like conjurers winds raised to a fearful blast,
And doe some mischief, but do never last. 
Now sir, will you not acknowledge that I have mightily advancte your practice?
Tic confessed, and I will make thee a great man for it.
I take a course to do that my self, for I drink sack in abundance.
O my rare rascal. We must remove.
Whither?
Any whither: Europe is to little to be cozned by us, I am ambitious to go to the East-Indies, thou and I to ride on our brace of Elephants.
And for my part I long to be in England again; you will never get so much as in England, we have shifted many countries, and many names: but trance the world over you shall never purse up so much gold as when you were in England, and called your self Doctor Lamb???stones.
It was an attractive name I confess, women were then my only admirers.
And all their visits was either to further their lust, or revenge injuries.
You should have forty in a morning beleager my closett, and strive who should be consent first, a???amongst fourscore love-sick weighting women that has come to me in a morning to learn what fortune should betide them in their first marriage, I have found above 94 to have lost their maidenheads.
By their own confession, but I was fine to be your male midwife, and work it out of them by cir???cumstance.
Thou wast, and yet for all this frequent resort of women and thy handling of their urinals and their cases, thou art not given to lechery, what should be the reason of it? thou hast wholesome flesh enough about thee; me thinks the devil should tempt thee too't.
What need he do that, when he makes me his instrument to tempt others.
Thou can not choose but utter thy rare good parts; thou wast an excellent bawd I acknowledge.
Well, and what I have done that way I will spare to speak of all you and I have done sir, and though we should???
We will for England, thats for certain.
We shall never want there.
Want? the Court of Wards shall want money first, for I profess my self Lord Paramount over fools and madfolkes.
Do but store your self with lies enough against you come thither,
Why thats all the familarity I ever had with the Devil, my gift of lying, they say hes the Father of lies, and though I cannot conjure, yet I profess my self to be one of his poor gossips. I will now reveal to thee a rare piece of service.
What is it my most worshipful Doctor Lamb???stones.
There is a Captain come lately from Sea,
They call Prosper I saw him this morning
Through a chincke of wainscot that divides my lodging
And the Host of the house, withdraw my Host, and Hostess, the fair Biancha, and an ancient gentlewoman into their bedchamber; I could not overhear their con???ference, but I saw such a mass of gold &amp; Jewels, &amp; when he had done he loc't it up into a casket; great joy there was amongst them &amp; forth they are gone into the city, and my Host told me at his going forth he thought he should not return till after supper; now sir, in their ab???sense will we fall to our picklocks, enter the chamber, seize the Jewels, make an escape from Florence, and wee are made for ever.
But if they should go to a true conjurer, and fetch us back in a whirl wind?
Doe not believe there is any such fetch in Astro???logy, and this may be a means to make us live honest hereafter.
Tic but an ill road too't that lies through the high way of thieving.
For indeed I am weary of this trade of fortune-telling, and mean to give all over, when I come into England, for it is a very ticklish quality.
And ith end will hang by a twine thread.
Besides the Island has too many of the profession, they hinder one another market.
No, no, the pillory hinders their market.
You know there the juggling captain.
I theres a sure card.
Only the fore-man of their jury is dead, but he dyed like a Roman.
Else tic thought he had made work for the hangman.
And the very Ball of your false prophets, hoe's quashed too.
He did measure the stars with a false yard, and may now travail to Rome with a mortar on's head to see if he can recover his money that way.
Come, come, lets fish for this casket, and to Sea presently.
We shall never reach London I fear;
My mind runs so much of hanging landing at wapping.
This well may be a day of joy long wished for
To my Clarissa, she is innocent.
Nor can her youth but with an open bosom
Meet Himens pleasing bounties, but to me
That am invirond with black guilt and horror
It does appear a funeral though promising much
In the conception were hard to manage
But sad in the event, it was not hate
But fond indulgence in me to preserve
Cesarios threatened life in open court
That forced me to disclaim him, choosing rather
To rob him of his birth-right, and honour
Then suffer him to run the hazard of
Enraged Baptistas fury, while he lives;
I know I have a son, and the Dukes sentence
A while deluded, and this tempest over,
When he assures himself despair hath seizd him.
I can relieve and raise him???speak, who is it
That presses on my privacies? Sir your pardon.
You cannot come unwelcome, though it were
To read my secret thoughts.
Lady to you
Mine shall be ever open; Lady said I,
That name keeps too much distance, sister rather
I should have stilt you, and I now may claim it,
Since our divided families are made one
By this blessed marriage; to whose honour comes
The Duke in person, waited on by all
The braveries of his Cot, to witness it,
And then to be our ghosts, is the bride ready
To meet and entertain him?
She attends the coming of your son.
Pray you bring her forth.
The Dukes at hand???Music in her loud voice,
Speaks his arrival.
Shoe's prepared to meet it. 
It were impertinent to wish you joy,
Since all joys dwell about you, Himens torch
Was never slighted with a luckier omen,
Nor burnt with so much splendour, to defer
With fruitless complement, the means to make
Your certain pleasures lawful to the world;
Since in the union of your hearts they are
Confirmed already: would but argue us
A boaster of our favours; to the Temple
And there the sacred knot once tide, all t'riumphs
Our Dukedom can afford, shall grace your nuptials.
On there.
I hope it is not in the power
Of any to cross us now.
But in the breath
Of a wronged Father I forbid the bands.
What, doe you stand at gaze?
Risen from the dead!
Although the sea had vomited up the figure
In which thy better part livd long imprisoned,
True love despising fear, runs thus to meet it.
In duty I kneel to it.
Hence vile wretches,
To you I am a substance incorporeal,
And not to be prophand, with your vile touch?
That could so soon forget me, but such things
Are neither worth my anger, nor reproof.
To you great sir, I turn my self and these
Immediate Ministers of your government,
And if in my rude language I transgress;
Ascribe it to the cold remembrance of
My services, and not my rugged temper.
Speak freely, be thy language ne'er so bitter,
To see thee safe Alberto, signs thy pardon.
My pardon? I can need none, it it be not
Received for an offence. I tamely bear
Wrongs, which a slave-born Muscovite would check at.
Why if for treason I had been delivered
Up to the hangmans Axe, and this dead trunk
Unworthy of a Christian Sepulchre;
Exposd a prey to feed the ravenous vulture,
The memory of the much I oft did for you,
Had you but any touch of gratitude,
Or thought of my deservings, would have stopped you
From these unjust proceedings.
Hear the motives that did induce us.
I have heard them all,
Your highness sentence, the whole Court abused,
By the perjuries, and practise of this woman.
(Wee pest thou Crocodile) my hopeful son,
Whom I dare swear mine own, degraded of
The honours that descend to him from me:
And from that in his love scorned by a creature
Whose base birth though made eminent by her beauty,
Might well have marked her out Cesarios servant,
All this I could have pardond and forgot;
But that my daughter with my whole estate
So hardly purchased, is assigned a dower;
To one whose Father, and whose family
I so de???est; that I would loose my essence
And be transformed to a Basilisk
To look them dead, to mee's an injury,
Admits no satisfaction.
Ther's none offered.
Nor would not be accepted,
Though upon thy knees it were tendered.
Now the storm grows high.
But that I thought thee dead, and in thy death
The briny Ocean had entombed thy name;
I would have sought a wife in a Bordello
For my Mentivole, and gladly hugd
Her spurious Issue as my lawful Nephews,
Before his blood should ere have mixed with thine;
So much I scorn it.
I'll not bandy words, but thus dissolve the contract.
There I meet thee, and seize on whats mine own.
For all my service,
Great Sir grant me the combat with this wretch,
That I may scourge his insolence.
I kneel for it.
And to approve my self Albertos son,
Isle be his second upon any odds,
Against him that dare most of Baptistas race.
Already upon honourable terms,
In me thou hast met thy better, for her sake
I'll add no more.
Sir, let our swords decide it.
O stay Sir, and as you would hold the title
Of a just Prince, ere you grant licence to
These mad-mens fury, lend your private ear
To the most distressed of women.
Speak, tic granted. 
In the mean time, let not Clarissa be
A patient looker on, though as yet doubtful,
To whom to bend her knee first, yet to all
I stoop thus low in duty, and would wash
The dust of fury with my Virgin tears,
From his blessed feet, and make them beautiful
That would move to conditions of peace,
Though with a snail like pace, they all are winged
To bear you to destruction: reverend sirs,
Think on your ancient friendship caemented
With so much blood, but shed in noble action,
Divided now in passion for a brawl;
The makers blush to own, much loved Caesario.
Brother, or friend, (each title may prevail,)
Remember with what tenderness from our child-hood
Wee loved together, you preferring me
Before your self, and I so fond of you
That it begot suspicion in ill minds
That our affection was incestuous.
Think of that happy time, in which I know
That with your dearest blood you had prevented
This shower of tears from me Mentivole,
My husband, registered in that bright star-chamber,
Though now on earth made strangers, be the example
And offer in one hand the peaceful Olive
Of concord??? or if that can be denied
By powerful intercession in the other
Carry the Hermian rod and force atonement,
Now we will not bee all marble. Deaths the worst then
And hee shall be my bridegroom, 
Hold Clarissa, his loving violence needs must
Offer inspire of honour 
Was it to that end then on your religion?
And my hope in heaven Sir.
Wee then will leave entreaties, and make use
Of our authority, must I cry ai-me
To this unheard of insolence? in my presence
To draw your swords, and as all reverence
Thats due to majesty were forfeited,
cherish this wilderness! sheath them instantly,
and show an alteration in your looks, or by my power
Cut of my head
And mine, rather then hear of peace with this bad man.
I'll not alone give up my throat, but suffer
Your rage to reach my family.
And my name to be no more remembered.
What are these?
Biancha, tic Biancha, still Biancha: but strangely altered.
If that thirteen years
Of absence could raze from my memory
The figure of my friend, I might forget thee;
But if thy Image be graven on my heart,
Thou art my Prospero.
Thou my Baptist?
A sudden change!
I dare not ask dear friend
If Juliana live! for thats a blessing
I am unworthy of, but yet deny not
To let me know the place she hath made happy
By having there her sepulchre.
If your highness please to vouchsafe a patient
Ear wee shall make a true relation of a story
That shall call on your wonder.
Speak, wee hear you.
Baptistas Fortune in the Genoa court,
His banishment, with his fair wives restraint
You are acquainted with; what since hath followed
I faithfully will deliver, ere eight moons
After Baptistas absence were complete,
Fair Juliana found the pleasures that
They had enjoyed together were not barren,
And blushing at the burden of her womb,
No father near to own it, it drew on
A violent sickness, which called down compassion
From the angry Duke, then careful of her health.
Physicians were enquired of, and their judgment
Prescribed the Bathes of Luca as a means
For her recovery; to my charge it pleased her
To be committed; but as on the way
Wee journeyed, those throws only known to women
Came thick upon her, in a private village.
She died?
Have patience, she brought to the world
A hopeful daughter; for her bodies sickness
It soon decayed, but the grief of her mind
Hourly increased, and life grew tedious to her,
And desperate ere to see you; she enjoined me
To place her in a Greeekish Monastery,
And to my care gave up her pretty daughter.
What monastery? as a Pilgrim bare-foot,
Isle search it out.
Pray you interrupt me not,
Now to my fortunes; the girl well disposed off
With a faithful friend of mine, my cruel fate
Made me a prisoner to the Turkish galleys,
Where for 12 years, these hands tugd at the oar,
But fortune tired at length with my afflictions,
Some ships of Malta met the Ottoman fleet,
Charged them and boarded them, and gave me freedom
With my deliverers I served, and got
Such reputation with the great Master
That he gave me command over a tall
And lusty ship, where my first happy service
Was to redeem Alberto rumor'd dead,
But was like me surprised by Cortugogly.
I would I had dyed there.
And from him learning
Baptist lived, and their dissolved friendship,
I hoised up sails for Greece, found Iuliana
A votary at her beads; having made known
Both that you lived, and where you were, she borrowed
So much from her devotion as to wish me
To bring her to you; if the object please you,
With joy receive her.
Rage and fury leave me- 
I am so full of happiness, theres no room left
To entertain you, O my long lost Jewel,
Light of mine eyes, my souls strength.
My best Lord, having Embraced you thus,
Death cannot fright me.
Live long to do so though J should fix here.
Pardon me Prospero though I enquire my daughters for???tune.
That your happiness
May be at all parts perfect, here she is!
Biancha daughter to a princess.
True with my faithful Host I left her,
And with him till now she hath resided,
Ignorant both of her birth and greatness.
O my blessed one. Joy upon joy overwhelms me.
Above wonder.
I doe begin to melt too, this strange story
Works much upon me.
Since it hath ples'd heaven
To grace us with this miracle, I that am
Heavens instrument here, determine thus; Alberto
Be not unthankful for the blessings shown you,
Nor you Baptist; discord was yet never
A welcome sacrifice; therefore rage laid by,
Embrace as friends, and let passed difference
Be as a dream forgotten.
Tic to me.
And me, and thus confirm it.
And to tie it
In bonds not to be broken, with the marriage???
Of young Mentivole, and fair Clarissa,
So you consent great Lady, your Biancha
Shall call Caesario Husband.
Tic a motion I gladly yield too.
One in which you make a sad man hap???pie. 
Kneel not, all forgiven.
With the Duke your Uncle I will make atone???meant, and will have no denial.
Let this day be still held sacred.
Now if you can conjure, let the Devil unbind you,
Wee are both undone,
Already wee feel it.
Justice sir,
What are they?
I can resolve you, slaves freed from the Galleys
By the Viceroy of Sicilia.
Whats their offence?
The robbing me of all my plate and Jewels,
I mean the attempting of it,
Please your grace I will now discover this var???let in earnest, this honest pestilent rogue, professed the art on conjuring, but all the skill that ever he had in the black art was in making a seacole fire; only with wearing strange shapes he begot admiration amongst fools and women.
Wilt thou preach thou varlet?
Why does he goggle with his eyes, and stake so?
This is one of his Magical raptures.
I doe vilify your censure, you demand if I am guilty, whir says my cloak by a trick foe legerdemain, now I am not guilty, I am guarded with innocence, pure silver lace I assure you.
Thus have I read to you your virtues, which notwithstanding I would not have you proud of.
Out thou concealment of tallow, and counter???feit Mummy.
To the Galleys with them both.
The only sea physic for a knave in to be basted in a gally with the oil of a Bulls peesell.
And will not you make a sour face at the same sauce, sir? I hope to find thee so lean, in one fortnight thou may be drawn by the ears through the hoop of a firkin.
Divide them and away with them to'th Galleys.
This will take down your pride Juggler.
This day that hath given birth to blessings; be???yond hope, admits no criminal sentence, to the Temple and there with humbleness praise heavens bounties;
For blessings ne'er descend from thence, but when
A sacrifice in thanks ascends from men. 
Plays have their fates, not as in their true sense
They're understood, but as the influence
Of idle custom madly works upon
The dross of many tongued opinion.
A worthy story, how soever writ
For language, modest mirth, conceit or wit,
Meets often times with the sweett commendation
Of hanged, tic scurvy, when for approbation
A Jig shall be clapped at, and every rime
Praised and applauded by a clamorous chime.
Let Jgnorance and laughter dwell together,
They are beneath the Muses pity. Hither
Come nobler Judgements, and to those the strain
Of our invention is not bent in vain.
The fair Maid of the In to you commends
Her hopes and welcomes, and withal intends
In the Entertains to which she doth invite ye,
All things to please, and some things to delight ye.

