SIr, you're the very friend I wished to meet with,
I have a large discourse invites your ear
To be an Auditor.
And what concerns it?
The sadly thriving progress of the loves
Between my Lord the Prince, and that great Lady,
Whose in•olencie, and never-yet-match'd pride,
Can by no Character be well expressed,
But in her only name, the proved Erota.
Alas Melitus, I should guess, the best
Success your Prince could find from her, to be
As harsh as the event doth prove: but now
It is not a time to pity passionate griefs,
When a whole Kingdom in a manner lies
Upon its death-bed bleeding.
Who can tell
Whether or no, these many plagues at once
Hang over this unhappy Land, for her sake,
That is a monster in it.
Here's the misery
Of having a child our Prince: else I presume
The bold Venecians had not dared to attempt
So bloody an Invasion.
Yet I wonder
Why, Master Secretary, still the Senate
So almost superstitiously adores,
Gonzalo the Venetian Lord, considering
The outrage of his Countrymen—
The Senate
Is wise, and therein just, for this Gonzalo,
Upon a Massacre performed at Sea
By the Admiral of Venice, on a Merchant
Of Candy, when the cause was to be heard
Before the Senate there, in open Court
Professed, that the cruelty the Admiral
Had showed, deserved not only fine, but death:
For Candy then, and Venice were at peace:
Since when upon a motion in the Senate,
For conquest of our Land, it is known for certain,
That only this Gonzalo dared to oppose it,
His reason was, because it too much savoured
Of Lawless, and unjust ambition.
The wars were scarce begun, but he (in fear
Of quarrels against his life) fled from his Country,
And hither came, where (to confirm his truth)
I know (Melitus) he, out of his own store,
Hath monied Cassilanes the General.
What, without other pledges then Cassilanes
Bare promise of payment?
No, it may be
He has some petty Lordship to retire to:
But this he hath done; now it is fit Melitus,
The Senate should be thankful, otherwise,
They should annihilate one of those Laws,
For which this Kingdom is throughout the world
Unfollowed, and admired.
What Laws are these? sir,
Let me so much importune you.
You shall,
And they be worth your knowledge; briefly thus:
Who ere he be that can detect apparently
Another of ingratitude, for any
Received benefit, the Plaintiff may
Require the offenders life; unless he please
Freely, and willingly to grant remission.
By which strict Law the Senate is in danger,
Should they neglect Gonzalo.
Right; the Law
Permits a like equality to Aliens,
As to a home-borne Patriot.
Pray sir the other?
Know Melitus,
The elder Cretins flourished many years,
In War, in Peace, unparalleled, and they
(To spur heroic spirits on to virtue)
Enacted that what man so ere he were,
Did noblest in the field against his enemy,
So by the general voice approved, and known,
Might at his home-returne, make his demand
For satisfaction, and reward.
They are
Both famous Laws indeed. 
Master Secretary,
The Senate is about to sit, and crave
Your presence.
What, so suddenly?
These Letters
Will show the causes why.
Heaven thou art great,
And worthy to be thanked▪
Your countenance sir
Doth promise some good tidings.
O the best
And happiest for this land, that ever was told!
All the Venetian Forces are defeated.
How Sir?
And what doth add some delight more,
There is amongst the Soldiers a contention
Who shall be the triumpher and it stands
Doubtful between a Father and his Son,
Old Cassilanes, and young Antinous.
Why may not both demand it?
The Law denies it:
But where the Soldiers do not all consent,
The parties in contention, are referred
To plead before the Senate; and from them,
Upon an open Audience, to be judged
The Chief, and then to make demands.
You ravish me
With wonder and delight,
Come: as we walk,
I shall more fully inform you. 
Admit no Soldier near us, till the Senate
Have took their places.
You are obeyed, my Lord.
Decius, fall off.
I shall.
Give leave Arcanes:
Young-man come nearer to me: who am I?
It were a sin against the piety
Of filial duty, If I should forget
The debt I owe my father on my knee;
Your pleasure?
What, so low? can thou find joints,
Yet be an Elephant? Antinous, rise:
Thou wilt belie opinion, and rebate
The ambition of thy gallantry, that they
Whose confidence thou hast bewitched, should see
Their little God of War, kneel to his father,
Though in my hand I did grasp Thunder.
Sir,
For proof that I acknowledge you the Author
Of giving me my birth, I have discharged
A part of my obedience. But if now
You should (as cruel fathers do) proclaim
Your right, and Tyrant like usurp the glory
Of my peculiar honours, not derived
From successary, but purchased with my blood,
Then I must stand first Champion for my self,
Against all interposers.
Boldly urged,
And proudly, I could love thee, did not anger
Consult with just disdain, in open language
To call thee most ungrateful. Say freely,
Wilt thou resign the flatteries, whereon
The reeling pillars of a popular breath,
Have raised thy Giant-like conceit; to add
A suffrage to thy fathers merit, speak?
Sir, hear me: were there not a Chronicle
Well pend by all their tongues, who can report
What they have seen you do; or had you not
Best in your own performance writ yourself,
And been your own Text, I would undertake
Alone, without the help of Art, or Character,
But only to recount you deeds in Arms,
And you should ever then be famed a president
Of living victory: But as you are
Great, and well worthy to be stiled great,
It would betray a poverty of spirit
In me to obstruct my fortunes, or descent,
If I should coward-like surrender up
The interest, which the inheritance of your virtue,
And mine own thrifty fate can claim in honour:
My Lord, of all the mass of fame, which any
That wears a sword, and hath but seen me fight,
Gives me, I will not share, nor yield one jot,
One tittle.
Not to me?
You are my father,
Yet not to you.
Ambitious boy, how dare thou
To tell me, that thou wilt contend?
Had I
Been slothful, and not followed you in all
The straights of death, you might have justly then
Reputed me a bastard; it is a cruelty,
More then to murder Innocents, to take
The life of my yet Infant-honour from me.
Antinous, look upon this badge of age,
Thy fathers gray-hair'd beard: full fifty years,
(And more then half of this, ere thou were borne)
I have been known a Soldier, in which time
I found no difference twixt War and Peace,
For War was peace to me, and Peace was war;
Antinous, mark me well; there hath not lived
These fifty years, a man whom Create preferred
Before thy father; let me boldly boast,
Thy father, both for Discipline, and Action,
Hath so long been the first of all his Nation;
Now can thou think it honest, charitable,
Nay humane, being so young, my son, my child,
Begot, bred, taught by me, by me thy father,
For one days service, and that on thy first,
To rob me of a glory which I fought for
A half of hundred years.
My case observes
Both equity, and presidents; for sir,
That very day whereon you got your fame,
You took it from some other, who was then
Chief in repute, as you are now; and had been
Perhaps as many years deserving that,
Which you gained in a day, as I have mine.
But he was not my father then Antinous.
Thou leave out that.
Sir had he been your father,
He had been then immortal: for a father
Heightens his reputation, where his son
Inherits it, as when you give us life,
Your life is not diminished, but renewed
In us, when you are dead, and we are still
Your living Images.
So be thou cursed
In thy posterity, as I in thee,
Dishonourable boy: O shall that Sun,
Which not a year yet since, beheld me mounted
Upon a fiery steed, waving my sword,
And teaching this young-man to manage Arms,
That was a raw, fresh novice in the feats
Of Chivalry, shall that same sun be witness
Against this brat, of his ingratitude?
Who to eclipse the light of my renown,
Can no way hope to get a Noble name,
But by the treading on his fathers greatness;
Thou wilt not yield? 
My life, but not the prize
My Sword hath purchased.
The Senate
My Lord are here at hand; and all the soldiers
Begin to throng about them.
Now Arcanes the—
What sir?
Trifles will affront us: that
Fine fighting Stripling,
Let him have the shame on it:
Please you withdraw on this side.
My great heart
Was never quaild before.
My Lord be confident,
Let not your father dant you.
Decius, whether
Must I withdraw?
On this side.—See the Soldiers
Attend your pleasure—courage sir; the Senate.
Way for the Senate.
My good Lords I know not
What tax of arrogance I may incur,
Should I presume, though courted by your favours,
To take a place amongst you: I had rather
Give proof of my unfeigned humility
By force, though mean, yet more becoming place,
Then run the hazard of a doubtful censure.
My Lord, your wisdom is both known &amp; tried;
We cannot rank ye in a nobler friendship,
Then your great service to the state deserves.
Will it please you sit? 
What here my Lord Porphicio?
It must not be.
My Lord you are too modest.
It is no season to be troublesome,
Else—But I have done: Your Lordships are observed.
Is the demandant ready?
He is ready.
Produce him then.
Before this sacred presence,
I, by a general consent, am made
The Soldiers voice, and to your gracious wisdoms,
Present as chief in Arms, his Countries Champion,
Cassilanes.
Most reverend Lords, you hear the lesser number
Of those who have been Guardians to this Country,
Approve this Champion; I in all their names
Who fought for Candy, here present before you
The mightiest man in Arms, Antinous.
Speak fellow soldiers.
Antinous, Antinous.
Stand by all, save the two competitors.
My Lords, how much your Country owes you both,
The due reward of your desertfull glories
Must to posterity remain: But yet
Since, by our Law, one only can make claim
To the proposed honours which you both
(It seems) have truly merited, take leave
Freely to plead your rights: we shall attend you.
Wherein priority of voice is granted
Lord Cassilanes to you: for that your rare
And long experience in the course of war,
As well doth challenge it, as the best privilege
Of Order and civility, for that
You are your brave opponents worthy father.
Say Countrymen, are you content?
I, I.
Right grave, right gracious fathers; how unfit
It is for me, that all my life time have
Been practised in the school of blood, and slaughter,
To bandy words now in my lifes last farewell,
Your wisdoms will consider; were there pitched
Another, and another field, like that
Which not yet three days since, this arm hath scattered,
Defeated, and made nothing, then the man
That had a heart to think he could but follow,
(For equal me he should not) through the lanes
Of danger and amazement, might in that,
That only of but following me, be happy,
Reputed worthy to be made my rival:
For it is not Lords, unknown to those about me,
(My fellow soldiers) first with what a confidence
I led them on to fight, went on still, and
And as if I could have been a second Nature,
As well in heartening them by my example,
As by my exhortation, I gave life
To quicken courage, to inflame revenge,
To heighten resolution; in a word,
To out-doe action: It boots not to discover,
How that young man, who was not sledged nor skil'd
In Martial play, was even as ignorant
As childish: But I list not to disparage
His non ability: The signal given
Of Battle, when our enemies came on,
(Directed more by fuerie, then warrant
Of Policy and Stratagem) I met them,
I in the fore-front of the Armies met them;
And as if this old weather-beaten body
Had been composed of Cannon-proof, I stood
The volleys of their shot. I, I my self
Was he that first dis-rankt their woods of Pikes:
But when we came to handy-stroaks, as often
As I lent blows, so often I gave wounds,
And every wound a death. I may be bold
To justify a truth, this very sword
Of mine slew more then any twain besides:
And, which is not the least of all my glory,
When he, this young man, hand to hand in fight,
Was by the General of the Venetians,
And such as were his retinue, unhorsed,
I stepped between, and rescued him my self,
Or horses hoofs had trampled him to dirt;
And whilst he was re-mounting, I maintained
The combat with the gallant General,
Till having taken breath, he thronged hefore me,
Renewed the fight, and with a fatal blow,
Stole both that honour from me, and his life
From him, whom I before my self alone,
Had more then full three quarters killed: A man
Well worthy only by this hand to have died,
Not by a Boys weak push: I talk too much,
But it is a fault of Age: If to bring home
Long peace, long victory, even to your Capitol;
If to secure your Kingdom, Wives, and Children,
Your lives and liberties; if to renown
Your honours through the world, to fix your names,
Like Blazing stars, admired, and feared by all,
That have but heard of Candy, or a Cretin,
Be to deserve the approvement of my man-hood,
Then thus much have I done: what more, examine
The Annals of my life; and then consider
What I have been, and am. Lords I have said.
With reverence to the Senate, is it lawful,
Without your Customs breach, to say a word?
Say on my Lord Gonzalo.
I have heard,
And with no little wonder, such high deeds
Of Chivalry discoursed, that I confess,
I doe not think the Worthies while they lived
All nine, deserved as much applause, or memory,
As this one: But who can doe ought to gain
The Crown of honour from him, must be somewhat
More then a man; you tread a dangerous path,
Yet I shall hear you gladly: for believe me,
Thus much let me profess, in honours cause,
I would not to my father, nor my King,
(My Countries father) yield: if you transcend
What we have heard, I can but only say,
That miracles are yet in use. I fear
I have offended.
You have spoken nobly.
Antinous use your privilege.
Princely fathers.
Ever I begin, one suit I have to make,
It is just, and honourable.
Poss. Speak, and have it.
That you would please the soldiers might all stand
Together by their General.
It is granted.
All fall to yonder side: Go on, Antinous.
I shall be brief and plain: All what my father
(This Countries Patron) hath discoursed, is true.
Fellows in Arms: speak you is it true?
True, true.
It follows, that the blaze of my performance
Took light from what I saw him doe; and thus
A City (though the flame be much more dreadful)
May from a little spark be set on fire;
Of all what I have done, I shall give instance
Only in three maine proofs of my desert.
First I sought out (but through how many dangers
My Lords judge ye) the chief, the great Commander,
The head of that huge body, whose proud weight
Our Land shrunk under, him I found and fought with,
Fought with, and slew. Fellows in Arms, speak you,
Is it true or not?
True, true.
When he was fallen,
The hearts of all our adversaries
Began to quail, till young Fernando, son
To the last Duke of Venice gathered head,
And soon renewed the field, by whose example
The bold Venetians doubling strength and courage
Had got the better of the day, our men
Supposing that their adversaries grew
Like Hydra's head, recoil, and 'gan to sly:
I followed them; and what I said, they know;
The sum on it is; I called them back, new ranked them;
Lead on, they followed, shrunk not till the end:
Fellows in Arms is it true, or no.
True, true.
Lastly, to finish all, there was but one,
The only great exploit; which was to take
Fernando prisoner, and that hand to hand
In single fight I did: my self without
The help of any arm, save the arm of heaven.
Speak soldiers, is it true, or no?
Antinous, Antinous.
Behold my prisoner, Fathers.
This one man
Ruined our Army, and hath glorified
Create in her robes of mightiness and conquest.
We need not use long circumstance of words,
Antinous thou art conqueror: the Senate,
The soldiers, and thy valour have pronounced it.
Antinous, Antinous.
Make thy demand.
Please ye (my Lord) give leave
That I may part.
No Cassilanes, the Court
Should therein be dishonoured, doe not imagine
We prize your presence at so slight a rate.
Demand Antinous.
Thus (my Lords) to witness
How far I am from arrogance, or thinking
I am more valiant, though more favoured
Then my most matchless father, my demand is,
That for a lasting memory of his name,
His deeds, his real, nay his royal worth,
You set up in your Capitol in Brass
My fathers Statue, there to stand for ever
A Monument and Trophy of his victories,
With this Inscription to succeeding ages,
Great Cassilanes, Patron of Candy's Peace,
Perpetual Triumpher.
It is granted. What more?
No more.
How boy?
Thou art immortal,
Both for thy Son-like piety, and beauties
Of an unconquered mind.
My Prisoner (Lords)
To your more sacred wisdoms I surrender:
Fit you his ransom; half whereof I give
For largess to the Soldiers: the other half
To the erection of this monument.
Ambitious villain.
Thou art all un-immitable.
My Lords to work a certain peace for Candy
With Venice, use Fernando like a Prince;
His ransom Isle disburse what ever it be:
Yet you may stay him with you, till conditions
Of amity shall be concluded on:
Are ye content?
We are, and ever rest
Both friends add debtors to your nobleness.
Soldiers attend me in the Market-place,
Isle thither send your largess.
Antinous, Antinous. 
I have a suit too, Lords.
Propose it, it is yours, if fit and just.
Let not my services,
My being forty years a drudge, a pack-horse
To you, and to the State, be branded now
With Ignominy ne'er to be forgotten:
Rear me no Monument, unless you mean
To have me famed a Coward, and be stamped so.
We understand you not.
Proud boy, thou dost,
And Tyrant-like insult'st upon my shame.
Sir, heaven can tell, and my integrity,
What I did, was but only to enforce
The Senates gratitude. I now acknowledge it.
Observe it Fathers, how this haughty boy
Grows cunning in his envy of mine honours:
He knows no mention can of me be made,
But that it ever likewise must be told,
How I by him was mastered; and for surety
That all succeeding times may so report it,
He would have my dishonour, and his Triumphs
Engraved in Brass: hence, hence proceeds the falsehood
Of his insinuating piety.
Thou art no child of mine: thee and thy blood,
Here in the Capitol, before the Senate,
I utterly renounce: So thrift and fate
Confirm me; henceforth never see my face,
Be, as thou art, a villain to thy father.
Lords I must crave your leaves: come, come 
Here's a strange high-borne spirit.
Tic but heat
Of sudden present rage; I dare assure
Antinous of his favour.
I not doubt it,
He is both a good man, and a good father.
I shall attend your Lordships.
Doe Antinous.
Yes: feast thy Triumphs,
With applause and pleasures.
Poss. Lead on. 
I utterly renounce—It was so?
Was it not, my Decius?
Pish, you know my Lord,
Old men are choleric.
And lastly parted
With, never henceforth see my face: O me,
How have I lost a Father? Such a father?
Such a one Decius! I am miserable,
Beyond expression.
Fie, how unbecomming
This shows upon your day of fame?
O mischief:
I must no more come near him; that I know,
And am assured on it.
Say you doe not?
True:
Put case I doe not: what is Candy then
To lost Antinous? Malta, I resolve
To end my days in thee.
How's that?
Isle try
All humble means of being reconciled,
Which if denied, then I may justly say,
This day has proved my worst: Decius my worst. 
NOw to what you have heard; as no man can
Better then I, give you her Character;
For I have been both nursed, and trained up to
Her petulant humours, and been glad to bear them,
Her brother, my late Master, did no less:
Strong apprehensions of her beauty hath
Made her believe that she is more then woman:
And as there did not want those flatterers
About the worlds Conqueror, to make him think,
And did persuade him that he was a god;
So there be those base flies, that will not stick
To buzz into her ears she is an Angel,
And that the food she feeds on is Ambrosia.
She should not touch it then, it is Poets fare.
I may take leave to say, she may as well
Determine of her self to be a goddess,
With lesser flattery then he a god:
For she does conquer more, although not farther.
Every one looks on her dyes in despair,
And would be glad to doe it actually,
To have the next age tell how worthily,
And what good cause he had to perish so:
Her beauty is superlative, she knows it,
And knowing it, thinks no man can deserve,
But ought to perish, and to dye for her:
Many great Princes for her love have languished,
And given themselves a willing sacrifice,
Proud to have ended so: And now there is
A Prince so manded in his own passions,
That he forgets the Royalty he was borne to,
And deems it happiness to be her slave.
You talk as if you meant to wind me in,
And make me of the number.
Sir, mistake me not, the service that I owe ye
Shall plead for me: I tell you what she is,
What she expects, and what she will effect,
Unless you be the miracle of men,
That come with a purpose to behold,
And go away your self.
I thank you, I will doe it: But pray resolve me,
How is the stored with wit?
As with beauty,
Infinite, and more to be admired at,
Then meddled with.
And walks her tongue the same gate with her feet?
Much beyond: what ere her heart thinks, she utters:
And so bold, so readily, as you would judge
It penned and studied.
She comes. 
I must leave you then,
But my best wishes shall remain with you.
Still I must thank you.
This is the most passionate,
Most pitiful Prince,
Who in the Cauldron of affections,
Looks as he had been par-boyl'd.
If I offend with too much loving you,
It is a fault that I must still commit,
To make your mercy shine the more on me.
You are the selfsame creature you condemn,
Or else you durst not follow me with hope
That I can pity you, who am so far
From granting any comfort in this kind,
That you and all men else shall perish first:
I will live free and single, till I find
Something above a man to equal me;
Put all your brave Heroes into one,
Your Kings and Emperors, and let him come
In person, of a man, and I should scorn him:
Must, and will scorn him.
The god of Love himself hath lost his eyes,
His Bow and Torch extinguished, and the Poets
That made him first a god, have lost their fire
Since I appeared, and from my eyes must steal it.
This I dare speak; and let me see the man,
Now I have spoke it, that doth, dare deny;
Nay, not believe it.
He is mad that does not.
Have not all the nations of the earth heard of me?
Most come to see me, and seeing me, returned
Full of my praises? teaching there Chroniclers
To make their Stories perfect? for where the name,
Merely the word of fair Erota stands,
It is a lasting History to time,
Begetting admiration in the men,
And in my own Sex envy; which glorie's lost,
When I shall stick my beauty in a cloud,
And clearly shine through it.
This Woman's in the altitudes, and he must be
A good Astrologer shall know her Zodiac.
For any man to think
Himself an able purchaser of you,
But in the bargain there must be declared
Infinite bounty: otherwise I vow,
By all thats excellent and gracious in you,
I would untenant every hope lodged in me,
And yield my self up Loves, or your own Martyr.
So you shall please us.
O you cannot be
So heavenly, and so absolute in all things,
And yet retain such cruel tyranny.
I can, I doe, I will.
She is in her
Moods, and her Tenses: Isle Gramer with you,
And make a trial how I can decline you:
By your leave (great Lady.)
What are you?
A man, a good man, that's a wealthy;
A Proper man, and a proud man too; one
That understands himself, and knows, unless
It be your self, no woman on the Universe deserves him.
Nay, Lady, I must tell you too withal.
I may make doubt of that, unless you paint
With better judgement next day then on this;
For (plain I must be with you) it is a dull Fucus.
Knows any one here what this fellow is?
He is of Venice (Madam) a great Magnifico,
And gracious with the Senate.
Let him keep then among them; what makes he here?
Here is state enough where I am: here's a doe—
You, tell him, if he have ought with us, let him
Look lower, and give it in Petition.
Mighty Magnifico, my Mistress bid me tell you,
If you have ought with her, you must look lower,
And yield it in Petition.
Here is for thee a Ducats.
You say well sir, take your own course.
I will not grace you
(Lady) so much as take you by the hand;
But when I shall vouchsafe to touch your lip,
It shall be through your Court a holy-day
Proclaimed for so high favour.
This is some
Great mans Jester: Sirrah, begone, here is
No place to fool in.
Where are the fools you talk of?
I doe keep two.
No question of it: for
In your self you doe maintain an hundred.
And besides them I keep a noble train,
Statists, and men of action: my purse is large and deep,
Beyond the reach of riot to draw dry:
Fortune did vie with Nature, to bestow
(When I was borne) her bounty equally:
Tic not amiss you turn your eyes from me;
For should you stand and gaze me in the face,
You perish would, like Simile by Iolus:
In Venice at this instant there do lye
No less then threescore Ladies in their graves,
And in their Beds five hundred for my love.
You lie more then they; yet it becomes him bravely;
Would I could walk and talk so? Isle endeavour it.
Sir, doe you know me?
Yes, you were sister to the late Prince of Candy,
Aunt to this young one: And I in Venice,
I am borne a Lord; equal to you in fortunes,
In shape; Isle say no more, but view.
There needs no more be said, were I a woman—
O he does rarely: in shape; Isle say no more,
But view: Who could say more, who better?
Man is no man, nor woman woman is,
Unless they have a pride like one of these.
How poor the Prince of Cyprus shows to him?
How poor another Lady unto her:
Carriage and State makes us seem demi-gods,
Humility, like beasts, worms of the earth.
Royal Lady, I kiss your hand.
Sir, I know you not.
O my noble Brother, welcome from the wars.
Dear sister.
Where is my father, that you come without him?
We have news of your success: he has his health I hope?
Yes sister, he has his health, but is not well.
How not well? what Riddles do you utter?
Isle tell you more in private.
Noble sir,
I cannot be unmindful of your merit,
Since I last heard it: you are a hopeful youth,
And (indeed) the soul of Candy.
I must speak my thoughts.
The Prince of Cyprus Brother, Good Decius.
I am his servant.
You are the Patron of your Country, sir,
So your unimitable deeds proclaim you,
It is no language of my own, but all men's.
Your Enemies must needs acknowledge it:
Then doe not think it flattery in your friends,
For if they had a heart, they could not want a tongue.
Is this your brother Annophill?
Yes Madam.
Your name's Antinous?
I am (Lady) that most unfortunate man.
How unfortunate? are you not the soldier,
The Captain of those Captains, that did bring
Conquest and victory home along with you?
I had some share in it; but was the least
Of the least worthy.
O sir, in your modesty youl'd make
A double Conquest: I was an eare-witnesse
When this young man spoke lesser then he acted,
And had the soldiers voice to help him out:
But that the Law compelled him for his honour,
To enforce him make a claim for his reward,
I well perceive he would have stood the man
That he does now, buried his worth in silence.
Sir, I hearken not to him, but look on you,
And find more in you then he can relate?
You shall attend on me.
Madam, your pardon.
Deny it not sir, for it is more honour
Then you have gotten in the field: for know you shall,
Upon Erota's asking, serve Erota.
I may want answers, Lady,
But never want a will to doe you service.
I came here to my sister, to take leave,
Having enjoined my self to banishment,
For some cause that hereafter you may hear,
And wish with me I had not the occasion.
There shall be no occasion to divide us:
Dear Madam for my sake use your power,
Even for the service that he ought to owe,
Must, and does owe to you, his friends, and country.
Upon your Loyalty to the state and me,
I doe command you Sir, not depart Candy:
Am I not your Princess?
You are a great Lady.
Then show your self a Servant and a Subject.
I am your vassal.
You are a Coward; I that dare not fight,
Scorn to be vassal to any Prince in Europe:
Great is my heart with pride, which Isle increase
When they are gone, with practise on my Vassailes.
The noble Cassilane is come to see you Madam,
There's comfort in those words, Antinous:
For here is the place, and persons that have power,
To reconcile you to his love again.
That were a fortunate meeting.
Greatness still wait you Lady.
Good Cassilane, we doe maintain our greatness,
Through your valour.
My prayers pull daily blessings on thy head,
My un-offending child, my Annophill.
Good Prince, worthy Gonzalo! ha? art thou here
Before me? in every action art thou ambitious?
My duty (Lady) first offered here,
And love to thee (my child) though he out-strip me;
Thus in the wars he got the start on me,
By being forward, but performing less;
All the endeavours of my life are lost,
And thrown upon that evil of mine own
Cursed begetting, whom I shame to father.
O that the heat thou robd'st me off, had burnt
Within my Entrails, and begot a fever,
Or some worse sickness, for thou art a disease
Sharper then any physic gives a name to.
Why doe you say so?
O Annophill; there is good cause my girl:
He has plaid the thief with me, and filched away
The richest jewel of my life, my honour,
Wearing it publicly with that applause,
As if he justly did inherit it.
Would I had in my Infancy been laid
Within my grave, covered with you blessings,
Then grown up to a man, to meet your curses.
O that thou had.
Then I had been the father of a child,
Dearer then thou were even unto me,
When hope persuaded me I had begot
Another self in thee: Out of mine eyes,
As far as I have thrown thee from my heart,
That I may live and dye forgetting thee.
How has he deserved this untamed anger,
That when he might have asked for his reward
Some honour for himself, or mass of pelf,
He only did request to have erected
Your Statue in the Capitol, with Titles
Engraved upon it, The Patron of his Country?
That, that's the poison in the gilded cup,
The Serpent in the flowers, that stings my honour,
And leaves me dead in fame: Gods doe a justice,
And rip his bosom up, that men may see,
Seeing, believe the subtle practises
Written within his heart: But I am heated,
And doe forget this presence, and my self.
Your pardon, Lady.
You should not ask, 'lesse you knew how to give.
For my sake Cassilane, cast out of your thoughts
All ill conceptions of your worthy son,
That (questionless) has ignorantly offended,
Declared in his penitence.
Bid me dye (Lady) for your sake Isle doe it;
But that you'll say is nothing, for a man
That has outlived his honour: But command me
In any thing save that, and Cassilane
Shall ever be your servant. Come Annophill,
(My joy in this world) thou shalt live with me,
Retired in some solitary nook,)
The comfort of my age; my days are short,
And ought to be well spent: and I desire
No other witness of them but thy self,
And good Arcanes.
I shall obey you sir.
Noble sir:
If you taste any want of worldly means
Let not that discontent you: know me your friend,
That hath, and can supply you.
Sir, I am too much bound to you already,
And it is not of my cares the least, to give you
Fair satisfaction.
You may imagine I doe speak to that end,
But trust me, it is to make you bolder with me.
Sir, I thank you, and may make trial of you,
Mean time my service.
Brother be comforted; so long as I continue
Within my fathers love, you cannot long
Stand out an Exile: I must go live with him,
And I will prove so good an Orator
In your behalf, that you again shall gain him,
Or I will stir in him another anger,
And be lost with you.
Better I were neglected: for he is hasty,
And through the Choler that abounds in him,
(Which for the time divides from him his judgement)
He may cast you off, and with you his life;
For grief will strait surprise him, and that way
Must be his death: the sword has tried too often,
And all the deadly Instruments of war
Have aimed at his great heart, but ne'er could touch it:
Yet not a limb about him wants a scarre.
Madam my duty—
Will you he gone?
I must (Lady) but I shall be ready,
When you are pleased command me, for your service.
Excellent Prince—To all my hearty love,
And a good farewell.
Thanks honest Cassilane.
Come Annophill.
Shall I not wait upon you sir?
From hence you shall not stir a foot:
Loving Gonzalo, it must be all my study
To requite you.
I may be so fortunate to deserve
The name of friend from you, I have enough.
You are so, and you have made your self so.
I will then preserve it.
Antinous you are my servant, are you not?
It hath pleased you so to grace me.
Why are you then dejected? you will say,
You have lost a father; but you have found a Mistress
Doubles that loss: be master of your spirit;
You have a cause for it.: which is my favour,
And mine.
Will no man ease me of this fool?
Your fellow.
Antinous wait upon us.
I shall Madam.
Nay but Lady, Lady.
Sir, you are rude: and if you be the Master
Of such means as you doe talk of, you should
Learn good manners.
O Lady, you can find a fault in me,
But not perceive it in your self; you must, shall hear me:
I love you for your pride, it is the best virtue
In you.
I could hang this fellow now: by whom
Are you supported, that you dare doe this?
Have you not example here in a Prince
Transcending you in all things, yet bears himself
As doth become a man had seen my beauty?
Back to your Country, and your Courtesans,
Where you may be admired for your wealth,
Which being consumed, may be a means to gain you
The opinion of some wit. Here's nothing
To be got but scorn, and loss of time.
Which are things I delight in.
Antinous follow me. 
She is vexed to the soul.
Let her be vexed, it is fit she should be so:
Give me thy hand Gonzalo, thou art in our favour,
For we doe love to cherish lofty spirits,
Such as percusteere the earrh, and bound
With an erected countenance to the clouds.
'S-foot, what thing is this?
I doe love fire-works, because they mount:
An Exhalation I profess to adore,
Beyond a fixed star, it is more illustrious,
As every thing raised out of smoke is so:
Their virtue is in action: what doe you think of me?
Troth sir,
You are beyond my guess, I know you not.
Doe you know your self?
Yes sir.
Why you and I are one: I am proud, and
Very proud too, that I must tell you; I saw
It did become you, cousin Gonzalo, prithee
Let it be so.
Let it be so good cousin.
I am no great ones fool.
I hope so, for alliance sake.
Yet I do serve the Mighty, Monstrous, and Magnanimous
Invincible Erota.
O good cousin, now I have you: Isle meet you in your Coat.
Coat? I have my horse-mans coat I must confess
Lined through with Velvet, and a Scarlet out-side;
If you'll meet me in it, Isle send fort;
And cousin you shall see me with much comfort,
For it is both a new one, and a right one,
It did not come collateral.
Adieu good cousin; at this present I have some business.
Farewell (excellent cousin.)
CAndy, I say, is lost already.
Yes,
If to be conqueror be to be lost.
You have it; one days conquest hath undone them,
And sold them to their vassalage; for what
Have I else toiled my brains, profusely emptied
My monies, but to make them slaves to Venice,
That so in case the sword did lose his edge,
Then Art might sharpen hers?
Gonzalo how?
Fernando thus: you see how through this Land,
Both of the best and basest I am honoured;
I only gave the State of Venice notice,
When, where, and how to land, or you had found
A better entertainment: I was he
Encouraged young Antinous to affront
The devil his father: for the devil I think
Dares not doe more in battle.
But why did ye?
I find no such great policy in that.
Indeed Fernando, thou can fight, not plot:
Had they continued one, they two alone
Were of sufficient courage and performance
To beat an Army.
Now by all my hopes,
I rather shall admire, then envy virtue.
Why then by all your hopes you'll rather have
Your Brains knocked out, then learn how to be wise;
You States-man? Well sir, I did more then this,
When Cassilane craved from the common treasure
Pay for his Soldiers, I struck home, and lent him
An hundred thousand Ducats,
Marry sir,
The policy was little, the love less,
And honesty least of all.
How say ye by that?
Go fight, I say go fight, Isle talk no more with you,
You are insensible.
Well, I shall observe ye,
Why look you sir, by this means have I got
The greatest part of Cassilanes estate
Into my hands, which he can ne'er redeem,
But must of force sink: do you conceive me now?
So:
But why have you importuned the Senate,
For me to sojourn with them?
There's the quintessence,
The soul, and grand elixir of my wit:
For he (according to his noble nature)
Will not be known to want, though he do want,
And will be bankrupted so much the sooner,
And made the subject of our scorn and laughter.
Here's a perfect plotted stratagem.
Why? could you
Imagine, that I did not hate in heart
My Countries enemies? yes, yes, Fernando,
And I will be the man that shall undo them.
Ye are in a ready way.
I was never out on it.
Peace,
Here comes a wise Coxcomb, a tame Coward.
Now worthy Gaspero, what,
You come (I know) to be my Lord Fernando's
Conductor to old Cassilane?
To wait upon him.
And my Lords the Senators sent you?
My noble Lord they did.
My Lord Fernando,
This gentleman (as humble as you see him)
Is even this Kingdoms treasure; In a word,
It is his chief glory that he is not wiser
Then honest, nor more honest then approved
In truth and faith.
My Lord.
You may be bold
To trust him with your bosom, he'll not deceive,
If you rely upon him once.
Your name is Gaspero?
Your servant.
Go commend me
(Right honest Gaspero) commend me heartily
To noble Cassilane, tell him my love
Is vowed to him.
I shall.
I know you will.
My Lord I cannot long be absent from you.
Sir, you are now my guide. 
Thus my designs
Run uncontrolled; yet Venice though I be
Intelligencer to thee, in my brain
Are other large Projects: for if proud Erota
Bend to my lure, I will be Candy's King,
And Duke of Venice too. Ha? Venice too?
O it was prettily shov'd in: why not? Erota
May in her love seal all sure: if she swallow
The bait, I am Lord of both; if not, yet Candy
Despite of all her power shall be ruined.
Urge me no farther Annophill.
My Lord.
Thy fathers poverty has made thee happy;
For though it is true, this solitary life
Suits not with youth and beauty, O my child,
Yet it is the sweetest Guardian to protect
Chaste names from Court-aspersions; there a Lady.
Tender and delicate in years and graces,
That dotes upon the charms of ease and pleasure,
Is shipwrecked on the shore; for it is much safer
To trust the Ocean in a leaking ship,
Then follow greatness in the wanton rites
Of luxury and sloth.
My wishes sir,
Have never soared a higher flight, then truly
To find occasion wherein I might witness
My duty and obedience.
It is well said,
Can thou forbear to laugh Arcanes?
Why sir?
To look upon my beggary, to look upon
My patience in my beggary: Tell me,
Does it show handsome? bravely?
Handsome? thou wilt flatter me,
And swear that I am miserable.
Nothing
More glorifies the noble, and the valiant,
Then to despise contempt: if you continue
But to enjoy your self, you in your self
Enjoy all store besides.
An excellent change:
I that some seven Apprentice-ships commanded
A hundred Ministers, that waited on
My nod, and sometimes twenty thousand soldiers,
Am now retired, attended in my age
By one poor maid, followed by one old man.
Sir, you are lower in your own repute
Then you have reason for.
The Roman Captains,
I mean the best, such as with their bloods
Purchased their Countries peace, the Empires glory,
Were glad at last to get them to some Farms,
Off-from the clamours of the ungrateful great ones,
And the unsteady multitude, to live
As I doe now, and it was their blessing too,
Let it be ours Arcanes.
I cannot but
Applaud your scorn of injuries.
Of injuries?
Arcanes, Annophill, lend both your hands
So, what say ye now?
Why now my Lord—
I swear
By all my past prosperities; thus standing
Between you two, I think my self as great,
As mighty, as if in the Capitol
I stood amidst the Senators, with all
The Cretin subjects prostrate at my feet.
Sir, you are here more safe.
And more beloved:
Why look ye sirs, I can forget the weakness
Of the traduced soldiers, the neglect
Of the faire-spoken Senate, the impiety
Of him, the villain, whom (to my dishonour)
The World miscalls my son.
But by the—
Sir, remember that you promised no occasion
Should move your patience.
Thou dost chide me friendly,
He shall not have the honour to be thought upon
Amongst us. 
Now? the news?
The Secretary,
With the Venetian prisoner, desire
Admittance to your Lordship.
How? to me?
What mystery is this? Arcanes can they
Think thou, mean any good?
My Lord, they dare not
Intend ought else but good.
Tic true, they dare not;
Arcanes welcome them: Come hither Annophill,
Stand close to me, we'll change our affability
Into a form of State: and they shall know
Our heart is still our own.
My Lord—
Arcanes,
I know them both: Fernando, as you are
A man of greatness, I should under-value
The right my sword hath fought for, to observe
Low-fawning complements, but as you are
A Captive and a stranger, I can love you,
And must be kind. You are welcome.
It is the all
Of my ambition.
And for proof how much
He truly honours your heroic virtues,
The Senate on his importunity,
Commend him to your Lordships guard.
For what?
During the time of his abode in Candy.
To be your household guest.
Wherein my Lord,
You shall more make me debtor to your nobleness,
Then if you had returned me without ransom.
Are you in earnest Sir?
My suit to the Senate
Shall best resolve you that.
Come hither Secretary,
Look that this be no trick now put upon me:
For if it be—Sirrah.—
As I have troth
(My Lord) it only is a favour granted
Upon Fernando's motion from himself:
Your Lordship must conceive, I'd not partake
Ought, but what should concern your honour; who
Has been the prop, our Countries shield, and safety,
But the renowned Cassilane?
Applause?
Is Gaspero—puff—nothing—why, young Lord,
Would you so much be sequestered from those
That are the blazing Comets of the time,
To live a solitary life with me?
A man forsaken? all my hospitality
Is now contracted to a few; these two,
This tempest wearied soldier, and this Virgin;
We cannot feast your eyes with Masques and Revels,
Or Courtly Antics: the sad sports we riot in,
Are Tales of foughten fields, of Martial scars,
And things done long ago, when men of courage
Were held the best, not those well-spoken youths,
Who only carry conquest in their tongues;
Now stories of this nature are unseasonable
To entertain a great Dukes son with.
Herein
Shall my Captivity be made my happiness,
Since what I lose in freedom, I regain
(With interest) by conversing with a Soldier
So much less for experience, as great Cassilane.
Pray sir admit me.
If you come to mock me,
I shall be angry.
By the love I bear
To goodness, my intents are honourable.
Then in a word, my Lord, your visitations
Shall find all due respect: But I am now
Grown old, and have forgot to be an host;
Come when you please you are welcome.
Sir, I thank you.
Good sir be not too urgent; for my father
Will soon be moved: yet in a noble way
Of curtsy he is as easily conquered.
Lady, your words are like your beauty, powerful;
I shall not strive more how to doe him service,
Then how to be your servant.
Shoe's my daughter,
And does command this house.
I so conceive her.
Doe you hear?
My honoured Lord.
Commend me to them.
Tell 'em I thank them.
Whom my Lord?
The Senate:
Why now come you so dull? O they are gracious,
And in〈8 letters〉 g•atefull  _____  Thou art eloquent,
Speak modestly in mentioning my services:
And if ought fall out in the By, that must
Of mere necessity touch any act
Of my deserving praises, blush when you talk on it,
Twill make them blush to hear on it.
Why my Lord—
Nay, nay, you are too wise now; good, observe me,
I doe not rail against the hopeful Springall,
That builds up monuments in Brass; reares Trophies
With Mottoes and Inscriptions, quaint devices
Of Poetry and fiction; let's be quiet.
You must not cross him.
Not for Candys wealth.
You shall for ever make me yours.
It were pity to double your captivity.
Who's here, Decius? 
Ha! Decius? who named Decius?
My duty to your Lordship: I am bold,
Presuming on your noble and known goodness
To.—
What?
Present you with this—
Letter?
Yes my honoured Lord.
From whom?
Please you peruse
The in-side, you shall find a name subscribed,
In such humility, in such obedience,
That you your self will judge it tyranny
Not to receive it favourably.
Hey-day.
Good words my Masters; this is Court-infection,
And none but Cowards ply them: Tell me, Decius,
Without more circumstance, who is the sender?
Your much grieved son Antinous.
On my life
A challenge; speak, as thou art worthy speak:
Isle answer't.
Honoured Sir.
No honoured Sirs—
Fool your young Idol with such pompous Attributes.
Say briefly, what contains it?
It is a lowly
Petition for your favour.
Rash young man,
But that thou art under my own roof, and know
I dare not any way infringe the Laws
Of hospitality, thou should repent
Thy bold and rude intrusion. But presume not
Again to show thy Letter, for thy life;
Decius, not for thy life.
Nay then (my Lord)
I can with-hold no longer: you are too rough,
And wrestle against nature, with a violence
More then becomes a father: wherein would ye
Come nearer to the likeness of God,
Then in your being entreated? Let not thirst
Of honour, make you quite forget you are
A man, and what makes perfect man-hoods, comforts
A father.
If a memory remain
Of my departed mother; if the purity
Of her unblemished faith deserve to live
In your remembrance, let me yet by these
Awake your love to my uncomforted Brother.
I am a stranger: but so much I tender
Your sons desertfull virtues, that I vow
His Sword ne'er conquered me so absolutely,
As shall your courtesy, if you vouchsafe
At 〈◊〉 our instances, to new receive him,
Into your wonted favour.
Sir, you cannot
Require more low submission.
Am I not
Grown vile yet in your eyes? then by the name
Of father, let me once more sue for him,
Who is the only now remaining-branch
With me, of that most ancient root, whose body
You are, dear sir.
It is well: an host of furies
Could not have baited me, more torturingly,
More rudely, or more most unnaturally?
Decius, I say, let me no more hear from him;
For this time go thou hence, and know from me
Thou art beholding to me that I have not
Killed thee already, look to it next, look to it.
Arcanes fie, fie Annophil, 
He's gone.
Chafed beyond sufferance: we must follow him.
Lady, this letter is to you.
Come with me,
For we must speak in private: please you sir,
To see what entertainment our sad house
Can yield? 
I shall attend you Lady.
How do ye like
To sojourn here, my Lord?
More then to feast
With all the Princes of the earth besides;
Gonzalo told me that thou were honest.
Yes sir.
And you shall find it.
Shall I?
All my follies
Be else recorded to my shame.
Enough,
My heart is here for ever lodged.
The Lady.
The place admits no time to utter all,
But Gaspero if thou wilt prove my friend,
I'll say thou art—
Your servant: I conceive ye,
We'll choose some fitter leisure.
Never man
Was (in a moment) or more blessed, or wretched. 
Leave us.
I shall. 
Antinous sit down.
Madam:
I say sit down: I do command you sit;
For look what honour thou did gain by me,
I can•ot lose by it: happy Antinous,
The graces, and the higher Deities
Smiled at thy birth, and still continue it:
Th•n think that I (who scorn lesser examples)
Must doe the like: such as do taste my power,
And talk of it, with fear and reverence,
Shall do the same unto the man I favour.
I tel thee youth, thou hast a conquest won,
Since thou came home, greater then that last,
Which dignified thy same; greater then if
Thou should go out again, and conquer farther;
For I am not ashamed to acknowledge
My self subdued by thee.
Great Lady—
Sit still, I will not hear thee else: now speak,
And speak like my Antinous, like my Soldier,
Whom Cupped, and not Mars, hath sent to Battle.
I must (I see) be silent.
So thou moist:
There's greater Action in it than in clamour,
A look, (if it be gracious) will begin the War,
A word conclude it: then prove no Coward,
Since thou hast such a friendly enemy,
That teaches thee to conquer.
You do amaze me Madam,
I have no skill, no practice in this War,
And whether you be serious, or please
To make your sport on a dejected man,
I cannot rightly guess: but be it as it will,
It ir a like unhappiness to me:
My discontents bear those conditions in them, 
And lay me out so wretched, no designs
(How ever truly promising a good)
Can make me relish ought, but a sweet-bitter,
Voluntary Exile. 
Why an Exile?
What comfort can there be in those companions 
Which sad thoughts bring along with?
Madam.
Whence comes this well-tun'd sound?
I know not Madam.
Listen wench:
What ever friendly hands they are that send it 
Let 'em play on; they are Masters of their faculty.
Doth it please you sir?
According to the time.
Go to 'em wench,
And tell 'em, we shall thank 'em; for they have kept
As good time to our disposition, as to their instruments;
Unless Antinous shall say he loves, 
There never can be sweeter accents uttered.
Let then the heart, that did employ those hands,
Receive some small share of your thanks with them,
It is happiness enough that you did like it;
A fortune unto me, that I should send it
In such a lucky minute; but to obtain
So gracious welcome, did exceed my hopes.
Good Prince, I thank you for it.
O Madam, pour not (to fast) joys on me,
But sprinkle 'em so gently, I may stand 'em▪
It is enough at first, you have laid aside
Those cruel angry looks out of your eyes,
With which (as with your lovely) you did strike
All your beholders in an Ecstasy.
Philander, you have long professed to love me,
Have I but professed it Madam?
Nay, but hear me?
More attentively, then to an Oracle.
And I will speak more truly, if more can be:
Nor shall my language be wrapped up in Riddles,
But plain as truth it self: I love this Gentleman,
Whose griefs has made him so incapable
Of Love, he will not hear, at least not understand it.
I that have looked with scornful eyes on thee,
And other Princes mighty in their states,
And in their friends as fortunate, have now prayed,
In a petitionary kind almost,
This man, this well deserving man, (that I must say)
To look upon this beauty, yet you see
He casts his eyes rather upon the ground,
Then he will turn 'em this way; Philander
You look pale; I'll talk no more.
Pray go forward: I would be your Martyr,
To dye thus, were immortally to live.
Will you go to him then, and speak for me?
You have loved longer, but not ferventer,
Know how to speak, for you have done it like
An Orator, even for your self: then how will you for me
Whom you profess to love above your self.
The curses of dissemblers follow me
Unto my grave, and if I do not so.
You may (as all men do) speak boldlier, better
In their friends cause still, then in your own;
But speak your utmost, yet you cannot seigne,
I will stand by, and blush to witness it.
Tell him since I beheld him, I have lost
The happiness of this life, food, and rest;
A quiet bosom, and the state I went with.
Tell him how he has humbled the proud,
And made the living but a dead Erota.
Tell him withal, that she is better pleased
With thinking on him, then enjoying these.
Tell him—Philander, Prince; I talk in vain
To you, you do not mark me.
Indeed, I do.
But thou dost look so pale,
As thou wilt spoil the story in relating.
Not, if I can but live to tell it.
It may be you have not the heart.
I have a will I am sure, how ever my heart
May play the coward, but if you please, I'll try.
If a kiss will strengthen thee, I give you leave
To challenge it, nay, I will give it you.
O that a man should taste such heavenly bliss!
And be enjoined to beg it for another.
Alas, it is a misery I grieve
To put you to, and I will suffer rather
In his tyranny, than thou in mine.
Nay Madam, since I cannot have your love,
I will endeavour to deserve your pity:
For I had rather have within the grave
Your love, then you should want it upon earth.
But how can I hope, with a feeble tongue
To instruct him in the rudiments of love,
When your most powerful beauty cannot work it?
Do what thou wilt (Philander) the request
Is so unreasonable, that I quit thee of it.
I desire now no more, but the true patience,
And fortitude of Lovers, with those helps
Of sighs and tears, which I think is all the Physic—
O if he did but hear you, it were enough;
And I will wake him from his Appoplexie.
Antinous.
My Lord?
Nay pray,
No courtesy to me, you are my Lord,
(Indeed you are) for you command her heart,
That commands mine: nor can you want to know it.
For look you she that told it you in words,
Explains it now more passionately in tears;
Either thou hast no heart, or a marble one,
If those drops cannot melt it; prithee look up,
And see how sorrow sits within her eyes,
And love the grief she goes with (if not her)
Of which thou art the parent: and never yet
Was there (by nature) that thing made so stony,
But it would love what ever it begot.
He that begot me, did beget these cares
Which are good issues, though happily by him
Esteemed monsters: nay, the ill-judging world
Is likely enough to give them those Characters.
What's this to love, and to love, and to the Lady? he's old,
Wrathful, perverse, selfe-will'd, and full of anger,
Which are his faults; but let them not be thine;
He thrusts you from his love, she pulls thee on,
He doubts your virtues, she doth double them:
O either use thy own eyes, or take mine,
And with them, my heart, then thou wilt love her,
Nay, dote upon her, more then on thy duty,
And men will praise thee equally for it;
Neglecting her, condemn thee, as a man
Unworthy such a fortune: O Antinous,
It is not the friendship that I bear to thee,
But her command, that makes me utter this:
And when I have prevailed, let her but say,
Philander, you must dye or this is nothing,
It shall be done together with a breath,
With the same willingness, I live to serve her.
No more Philander.
All I have done, is little yet to purpose,
But ere I leave him, I will perceive him blush;
And make him feel the passions that I do,
And every true lover will assist me in it,
And lend me their sad sighs to blow it home,
For Cupped wants a dart to wound this bosom.
No more, no more Philander, I can endure no more,
Pray let him go; go good Antinous, make peace
With your own mind, no matter though I perish. 
I Cannot help it.
Nor do I require it,
The malady needs no Physician,
Help hospital people.
I am glad to hear
You are so valiant.
Valiant?
Can any man be proud that is not valiant;
Foolish woman, what would thou say? thou—
I know not what to call thee.
I can you,
For I can call you Coxcome, Ass, and Puppy.
You do do it, I thank you.
That you'll lose a fortune,
Which a Cobbler better deserves, then thou dost.
Do not provoke my magnanimity,
For when I am insens'd, I am insensible;
Go tell thy Lady, that hath sent me word
She will discard me, that I discard her,
And throw a scorn upon her, which I would not,
But that she does me wrong.
Do you not glory in your conquest more,
To take some great man prisoner, then to kill him?
And shall a Lady find less mercy from you,
That yields her self your Captive, and for her Ransom,
Will give the jewel of her life, her heart,
Which she hath locked from all men but thy self:
For shame (Antinous) throw this dullness off,
Art thou a man no where but in the field?
He must here Drums, and Trumpets ere he sleeps,
And at this instant dreams he's in his Armour:
These Iron-hearted Soldiers are so cold,
Till they be beaten to a women's arms,
And then they love 'em better then their own;
No Fort can hold them out.
What pity is it (Madam) that your self,
Who are all excellence, should become so wretched,
To think on such a wretch as grief hath made me?
Seldom despairing men look up to heaven,
Although it still speak to 'em in its glories;
For when sad thoughts perplex the mind of man,
There is a plumit in the heart, that weighs,
And pulls us (living) to the dust we came from;
Did you but see the miseries you pursue,
(As I the happiness that I avoid
That doubles my afflictions) you would fly
Unto some wilderness, or to your grave,
And there find better comforts then in me,
For love, and cares can never dwell together.
They should,
If thou had but my love, and I thy cares.
What wild beast in the Desert, but would be
Taught by this Tongue to leave his cruelty,
Though all the beauties of the face were veiled!
But I am savager than any beast,
And shall be so till Decius do arrive,
Whom with so much submission I have sent
Under my hand, that if he do not bring
His Benediction back, he must to me
Be much more crueler, then I to you.
Is it but your fathers pardon you desire?
With his love, &amp; then nothing next that, like yours.
Decius is come. 
O welcome friend; If I apprehend not
Too much of joy, there's comfort in thy looks.
There is indeed: I prithee Decius speak it.
How? prithee Decius? this woman's strangely altered.
Why dost not speak (good friend) and tell me how
The reverent blessing of my life, received
My humble lines; wept he for joy?
No, ther's a letter will inform you more:
Yet I can tell you, what I think will grieve you,
The old man is in want, and angry still,
And poverty is the bellows to the Coal,
More then distaste from you as I imagine.
What's here? how's this? It cannot be: now sure
My griefs delude my senses.
In his looks,
I read a world of changes: Decius mark
With what a sad amazement he surveys
The news: can thou guess what it is?
None good I fear.
I fear so too: and then—
It is her hand.
Are you not well?
Too well: if I were ought
But Rock, this Letter would conclude my miseries,
Peruse it (Lady) and resolve me then,
In what a case I stand.
Sir, the worst is,
Your fathers lowness, and distaste.
No Decius,
My sister writes, Fernando has made suite
For love to her: and to express sincerely
His constant truth, hath like a noble Gentleman,
Discovered plots of treachery; contrived
By false Gonzalo, not intending more
The utter ruin of our house, then generally
Candies confusion.
It is a generous part
Of young Fernando.
It is, and I could wish
All thrift to his affections Decius.
You find the sum on it Madam.
Yes, I do.
And can you now yet think a heart oppressed
With such a throng of cares, can entertain
An amorous thought? love frees all toils but one,
Calamity and it can ill agree.
Will it please ye speak my doom?
Alas great Lady,
Why will you slatter thus a desperate man,
That is quite cast away? O had you not
Procured the Senates warrant to enforce
My stay, I had not heard of these sad news.
What would you have me do?
Love me, or kill me,
One word shall sentence either: for as truth
Is just, if you refuse me, I am resolute
Not to out-live my thraldom.
Gentle Lady.
Say, must I live, or dye?
My Lord, how can you
Be so inexorable: here's occasion
Of succouring your father in his wants,
Securely proffered: pray sir, entertain it.
What is my sentence?
What you please to have it?
As thou art Gentle, speak those words again.
Madam, you have prevailed; yet give me leave
Without offence, ere I resign the interest
Your heart hath in my heart, to prove your secrecy.
Antinous, it is the greatest Argument
Of thy affections to me.
Madam, thus then,
My father stands for certain sums engaged
To treacherous Gonzalo; and has more gaged
The greatest part of his estate to him:
If you receive this mortgage, and procure
Acquitance from Gonzalo to my father,
I am what you would have me be.
You'll love me then?
Provided (Madam) that my father know not
I am an Agent for him.
If I fail
In this, I am unworthy to be loved.
Then (with your favour) thus I seal my truth,
To day, and Decius witness how unchangingly
I shall still love Erota.
Thou hast quickened
A dying heart Antinous.
This is well:
Much happiness to both. 
The Lord Gonzalo
Attends you Madam.
Comes as we could wish,
Withdraw Antinous, here's a Closet, where
You may partake his errand; let him enter. 
Madam you must be wary. 
Fear it not,
I will be ready for him; to entertain him
With smiling welcome: Noble sir, you take
Advantage of the time; it had been fit
Some notice of your presence, might have fashioned
A more prepared state.
Do ye mock me Madam?
Trust me, you wrong your judgement, to repute
My gratitude a fault: I have examined
Your portly carriage, and will now confess
It hath not slightly won me.
The wind's turned;
I thought it would come to this: it pleased us Madam,
At our last interview, to mention love,
Have you considered on it?
With more then common
Content: but sir, if what you spake, you meant,
(As I have cause to doubt) then—
What, (sweet Lady?)
Methinks me should lay by this form of stateliness.
Loves courtship is familiar, and for instance,
See what a change it hath begot in me,
I could talk humbly now, as Lovers use.
And I: and I: we meet in one selfe-center,
Of blessed consent.
I hope my weakness sir,
Shall not deserve neglect: but if it prove so,
I am not the first Lady has been ruined
By being too credulous: you will smart for it one day.
Angell-like-Lady, let me be held it villain,
If I love not sincerely.
Would I knew it?
Make proof by any fit command.
What, do ye mean to many me?
How? mean? nay more, I mean
To make you Empress of my earthly fortunes,
Regent of my desires, for did ye covet
To be a real Queen, I could advance you.
Now I perceive you slight me, and would make me
More simple then my sexes frailety warrants.
But say your mind, and you shall be a Queen.
On those conditions, call me yours.
Enough,
But are we safe?
Assuredly.
In short,
Yet Lady first be plain: would you not choose
Much rather to prefer your own Sun-rising,
Then any's else though ne'er so near entitled
By blood, or right of birth?
Tic a question
Needs not a resolution.
Good: what if
I set the Crown of Candy on your head?
I were a Queen indeed then.
Madam, know
There's but a boy twixt you, and it suppose him
Transhap'd into an Angel.
Wise Gonzalo,
I cannot but admire thee.
It is worth thinking on:
Besides your husband shall be Duke of Venice.
Gonzalo, Duke of Venice?
Ye are mine ye say.
Pish: you but dally with me; and would lull me
In a rich golden dream.
You are too much distrustful of my truth.
Then you must give me leave to apprehend
The means, and manner how.
Why thus—
You shall not,
We may be over-heard; Affairs and counsels
Of such high nature, are not to be trusted
Not to the Air it self, you shall in writing,
Draw out the full design; which if effected,
I am as I profess.
O I applaud
Your ready care, and secrecy.
Gonzalo,
There is a bar yet, twixt our hopes and us,
And that must be removed.
What is it?
Old Cassilane.
He? fear not him: I build upon his ruins
Already.
I would find a smoother course
To shift him off.
As how?
We'll talk in private,
I have a ready plot.
I shall adore you. 
Madam, although I hate unnoble practices,
And therefore have performed no more then what
I ought, for honours safety: yet Annophil,
Thy love hath been the spur, to urge me forward
For speedier diligence.
Sir your own fame
And memory will best reward themselves.
All gain is loss (sweet beauty) if I miss
My comforts here: The brother and the sister
Have double conquered me, but thou moist triumph.
Good sir, I have a father.
Yes, a brave one;
Coldest thou obscure thy Beauty, yet the happiness
Of being but his daughter, were a dowre
Fit for a Prince: what say ye?
You have deserved
As much as I should grant.
By this fair hand
I take possession.
What in words I dare not,
Imagine in my silence.
Thou art all virtue.
I'll tell thee how: Baldwin the Emperor,
Pretending title, more through tyranny,
Then right of conquest, or descent, usurped
The stile of Lord o'er all the Grecian Islands,
And under colour of an amity
With Cre•t, preferred the Marquess Mountferato
To be our Governor; the Creations vexed
By the ambitious Turks, in hope of aide
From the Emperor, received for General,
This Mountferato; he (the wars appeased)
Plots with the state of Venice, and takes money
Of them for Candy: they paid well, he steals
Away in secret; since which time, that right
The state of Venice claims o'er Candy, is
By purchase, not inheritance, or Conquest:
And hence grows all our quarrel.
So a usurer
Or Lumbard-Jew, might with some bags of trash,
Buy half the Western world.
Money Arcanes
Is now a God on earth: it cracks virginities,
And turns a Christian, Turk;
Bribes justice, cut-throats honour, does what not?
Not captives Candy.
Nor makes thee dishonest,
Nor me a Coward—Now sir, here is homely,
But friendly entertainment.
Sir, I find it.
And like it, do ye not?
My repair speaks for me.
Fernando we were speaking off—how this?
Your friend, and servant.
Creditors, my Lord,
Are Masters and no Servants: as the world goes,
Debtors are very slaves to those to whom
They have been beholding to; in which respect,
I should fear you Gonzalo.
Me my Lord?
You owe me nothing.
What nor love, nor money?
Yes, love, I hope not money.
All this bravery,
Will scarcely make that good.
It is done already:
See sir, your Mortgage which I only took,
In case you and your son had in the wars
Miscarried: I yield it up again: it is yours.
Are ye so conscionable?
It is your own.
Pish, pish, I'll not receive what is not mine,
That were a dangerous business.
Sir, I am paid for it,
The sums you borrowed, are returned; The bonds
Cancelled, and your acquittance formerly sealed:
Look here sir, Gaspero is witness to it.
My honoured Lord, I am.
My Lord Fernando,
Arcanes and the rest, you all shall testify,
That I acquit Lord Cassilane for ever,
Of any debts to me.
It is plain and ample:
Fortune will once again smile on us fairly.
But hark ye, hark ye, if you be in earnest,
Whence comes this bounty? or whose is it?
In short,
The great Erota, by this Secretary,
Returned me my full due.
Erota? why
Should she do this?
You must ask her the cause,
She knows it best.
So ho; Arcanes, none
But women pity us? soft-hearted women,
I am become a brave fellow now, Arcanes,
Am I not?
Why sir, if the gracious Princess
Have took more special notice of your services,
And means to be more thankful than some others,
It were an injury to gratitude,
To disesteem her favours.
Sir she ever
For your sake most respectively loved me.
The Senate, and the body of this Kingdom,
Are herein (let me speak it without arrogance)
Beholding to her: I will thank her for it;
And if she have reserved a means whereby
I may repay this bounty with some service,
She shall be then my Patronise: come sirs,
We'll taste a cup of wine together now.
I must speak with you in secret.
You shall—Now Gaspero, ell's well.
There's news
You must be acquainted with.
Come, there is no master-peece in Art, like Policy. 
T The Senate is informed at full.
Gonzalo.
Dreams not of my arrival yet.
Nor thinks
It is possible his plots can be discovered:
He fats himself with hopes of Crowns, and Kingdoms,
And laughs securely, to imagine how
He means to gull all but himself: when truly,
None is so grossly gulled as he.
There was never
A more arch villain.
Peace, the Senate comes.
How closely, Treason cloaks it self in forms
Of Civil honesty?
And yet how palpably
Does heaven reveal it?
Gracious Lords.
The Ambassador,
Lord Paulo Michael, Advocate
To the great Duke of Venice.
You are most welcome,
Your Master is a just and noble Prince.
My Lords, he bad me say; that you may know
How much he scorns, and (as good Princes ought)
Daisies base indirect, and godless treacheries;
To your more Sacred wisdoms he refers
The punishment due to the false Gonzalo,
Or else to send him home to Venice.
Herein
The Duke is royal: Gaspero the Prince
Of Cyprus answered he would come.
My Lords,
He will not long be absent 
You Fernando,
Have made the State your debtor: worthy Prince,
We shall be suitors to you for your presence,
In hearing, and determining of matters
Greatly concerning Candy.
Fathers, I am
A stranger.
Why, the cause (my Lord) concerns
A stranger: please you seat your self.
How ever
Unfit, since you will have it so (my Lords)
You shall command me.
You my Lord Fernando,
With the Ambassador, withdraw a while.
My Lords, we shall. 
Melitus, and the Secretary,
Give notice to Gonzalo, that the Senate
Requires his presence. 
What concerns the business? 
Thus noble Prince—
Let me alone, thou trouble me,
I will be heard.
You know not what you doe.
Forbear: who's he that is so rude? whats he that dares
To interrupt our counsels?
One that has guarded,
Those Purple robes from Cankers worse then Moods,
One that hath kept your fleeces on your backs,
That would have been snatched from you: but I see
It is better now to be a dog, a Spaniel
In times of Peace, then boast the bruised scars,
Purchased with loss of blood in noble wars:
My Lords, I speak to you.
Lord Cassilane,
We know not what you mean.
Yes, you are set
Upon a bench of justice; and a day
Will come (hear this, and quake ye potent great ones)
When you your selves shall stand before a judge,
Who in a pair of scales will weigh your actions,
Without abatement of one grain: as then
You would be found full weight, I charge ye fathers
Let me have justice now.
Lord Cassilane,
What strange distemperature provokes distrust
Of our impartiality? be sure
We'll flatter no mans injuries.
It is well;
You have a Law (Lords) that without remorse
Dooms such as are belcapred with the curse
Of foul ingratitude unto death.
We have.
Then do me justice.
Mad-man, whether run'st thou?
Peace Decius, I am deaf.
Will you forget
Your greatness and your modesty?
Hyparcha leave, I will not hear,
Lady; great, gentle, Lady.
Prithee young-man forbear to interrupt me,
Triumph not in thy fortunes; I will speak.
More uproars yet; who are they that disturb us?
The viper's come; his fears have drawn him hither,
And now (My Lords) be Chronicled for ever,
And give me justice against this vile Monster,
This bastard of my blood.
It is justice fathers,
I sue for too: and though I might command it,
(If you remember Lords, whose child I was)
Yet I will humbly beg it; this old wretch
'Has forfeited his life to me.
Tricks, tricks;
Complots, devices, twixt these pair of young-ones,
To blunt the edge of your well tempered Swords,
Wherewith you strike offenders, (Lords) but I
Am not a baby to be feared with bug-beares,
It is justice I require.
And I.
You speak too tenderly; and too much, like your self
To mean a cruelty; which would make monstrous
Your Sex: yet for the loves sake, which you once
Pleased to pretend, give my grieved father leave
To urge his own revenge; you have no cause
For yours: keep peace about ye.
Will you hear me?
Here's some strange novelty.
Sure we are mocked,
Speak one at once: say wherein hath your Son
Transgressed the Law?
O the gross mists of dullness;
Are you this Kingdoms Oracles, yet can be
So ignorant? first hear, and then consider,
That I begot him, gave him birth and life,
And education, were I must confess,
But duties of a father: I did more;
I taught him how to manage Arms, to dare
An Enemy; to court both death and dangers;
Yet these were but additions to complete
A well accomplished Soldier: I did more yet.
I made him chief Commander in the field
Next to my self, and gave him the full prospect
Of honour, and preferment; trained him up
In all perfections of a martiallist:
But he unmindful of his gratitude,
You know with what contempt of my deserts,
First kicked against mine honour, scorned all
My services; then got the palm of glory
Unto himself: yet not content with this,
He (lastly) hath conspired my death, and sought
Means to engage me to this Lady's debt,
Whose bounty, all my whole estate could never
Give satisfaction too: now honoured fathers,
For this cause only, if your Law be law,
And you the Ministers of justice; then
Think of this strange ingratitude in him.
Can this be so Antinous?
It is all true,
Nor hath my much wronged father limned my faults
In colours half so black, as in themselves,
My guilt hath dyed them: were there mercy left,
Yet mine own shame would be my Executioner:
Lords, I am guilty.
Thou belie Antinous,
Thine innocence: alas (my lords) hoe's desperate,
And talks he knows not what: you must not credit
His lunacy; I can my self disprove
This accusation: Cassilane, be yet
More merciful; I beg it.
Time, nor fate,
The world, or what is in it, shall not alter
My resolution; he shall dye.
The Sonnets
Prayers; or weeping Lovers, shall not alter
My resolution: thou shalt dye.
Why Madam,
Are ye all Marble?
Leave your shifts Antinous,
What plead you to your fathers accusation?
Most fully guilty.
You have doomed your self,
We cannot quit you now.
A burdened conscience
Will never need a hang-man: had thou dared
To have denied it, then this Sword of mine
Should on thy head have proved thy tongue a liar.
Thy sword? wretched old man, thou hast lived too long
To carry peace or comfort to thy grave;
Thou art a man condemned: my Lords this tyrant
Had perished but for me, I still supplied
His miserable wants; I sent his daughter
Money to buy him food; the bread he eat,
Was from my purse: when he (vaingloriously)
To dive into the peoples hearts, had pawned
His birth-right, I redeemed it, sent it to him,
And for requital, only made my suite,
That he would please to new receive his son
Into his favour, for whose love I told him
I had been still so friendly: But then he
As void of gratitude, as all good nature,
Distracted like a mad man, posted hither
To pull this vengeance on himself, and us;
For why, (my Lords) since by the Law, all means
Is blotted out of your commission,
As this hard hearted father hath accused
Noble Antinous, his unblemished Son,
So I accuse this father, and crave judgement.
All this is but deceit, mere trifles forged
By combination to defeat the process
Of Justice, I will have Antinous life.
Sir, what do ye mean?
I will have Cassilane's.
Cunning and cruel Lady, runs the stream
Of your affections this way? have you not
Conquest enough by treading on my grave?
Unless you send me thither in a shroud
Steeped in my fathers blood? as you are woman,
As the protests of love you vowed were honest;
Be gentler to my father.
Cassilane,
Thou hast a heart of flint: let my entreats,
My tears, the Sacrifice of griefs unfeigned,
Melt it: yet be a father to thy son,
Unmask thy long besotted judgement, see
A low obedience kneeling at the feet
Of nature: I beseech you.
Pish you cousin
Your hopes: your plots are idle: I am resolute.
Antinous, urge no further.
Hence thou Sorcery
Of a beguiling softness, I will stand,
Like the earths Center, unmoved; Lords your breath
Must finish these divisions: I confess
Civility doth teach I should not speak
Against a Lady of her birth, so high
As great Erota, but her injuries
And thankless wrongs to me, urge me to cry
Aloud for justice, Fathers.
Whether run you?
For (honoured fathers) that you all may know
That I alone am not unmatchable
In crimes of this condition, lest perhaps
You might conceive, as yet the case appears,
That this foul stain, and guilt runs in a blood;
Before this presence, I accuse this Lady
Of as much vile ingratitude to me.
Impudent Traitor!
Her? O spare Antinous;
The world reputes thee valiant, do not soil
All thy past nobleness with such a cowardice,
As murdering innocent Ladies will stamp on thee?
Brave Prince, with what unwillingness I force
Her follies, and in those her sin, be witness,
All these about me: she is bloody minded.
And turns the justice of the Law to rigour:
It is her cruelties, not I accuse her:
Shall I have Audience?
Let him speak my Lords.
Your memory will rot.
Cast all your eyes
On this, what shall I call her? truthlesse woman,
When often in my discontents, the sway
Of her unruly blood, her untamed passion,
(Or name it as you list) had hour by hour
Solicited my love, she vowed at last
She could not, would not live unless I granted
What she long sued for: I in tender pity,
To save a Lady of her birth, from ruin
Gave her her life, and promised to be hers:
Nor urged I ought from her, but secrecy,
And then enjoined her to supply such wants
As I perceived my fathers late engagements
Had made him subject to; what, shall I heap up
Long repetitions? she to quit my pity,
Not only hath discovered to my father
What she had promised to conceal, but also
Hath drawn my life into this fatal forfeit;
For which, since I must dye, crave a like
Equality of justice against her;
Not that I covet blood, but that she may not
Practice this art of falsehood on some other,
Perhaps more worthy of her love hereafter.
If this be true—
My Lords, be as the Law is,
Indifferent, upright, I do plead guilty:
Now sir, what glory have you got by this?
Alas man, I meant not to outlive thy doom;
Shall we be friends in death?
Hear me, the villain
Scandals her, honoured Lords.
Leave off to dote,
And dye a wise man▪
I am over-reach'd,
And mastered in my own resolution.
Will ye be wilful Madam? here's the curse
Of loves disdain.
Why sit you like dumb Statues?
Demur no longer.
Cassilane, Erota,
Antinous, death ye ask; and it is your dooms,
You in your follies lived, dye in your follies.
I am revenged, and thank you for it.
Yes, and I: Antinous hath been gracious.
Sir, may I presume to crave a blessing from you
Before we part.
Yes, such a one as Parents
Bestow on cursed sons now, now, I laugh
To see how those poor younglings are both cheated
Of life and comfort: look ye, lookye, Lords,
I go but some ten minutes (more or less)
Before my time, but they have fiuely coz'nd
Themselves of many, many hopeful years
Amidst their prime of youth and glory; now 
My vengeance is made full. Welcome my joy,
Thou come to take a seasonable blessing
From thy half buried fathers hand; I am dead
Already girl, and so is she and he,
We all are wormes-meat now.
I have heard all;
Nor shall you dye alone: Lords on my knees
I beg for justice too.
Against whom, for what?
First let me be resolved; does the Law favour
None, be they ne'er so mighty?
Not the greatest.
Then justly I accuse of foul ingratitude
(My Lords) you of the Senate all, not one
Excepted.
Porp. Us?
Annophill—
You are the Authors
Of this unthrifty bloud-shed; when your enemies
Came marching to your gates, your children sucked not
Safe at their mothers breasts, your very Cloisters
Were not secure, your starting-holes of refuge
Not free from danger, nor your lives your own:
In this most desperate Ecstasy, my father,
This aged man, not only undertook
To guard your lives, but did so; and beat off
The daring foe; for you he pawned his lands,
To pay your soldiers, who without their pay
Refused to strike a blow: but (Lords) when peace
Was purchased for you, and victory brought home;
Where was your gratitude, who in your Coffers
Hoarded the rusty treasure which was due
To my unminded father? he was glad
To live retired in want, in penury,
Whilst you made feasts of surfeit, and forgot
Your debts to him: The sum of all is this,
You have been unthankful to him; and I crave
The rigour of the Law against you all.
My Royal spirited daughter!
Annophill.
Thou art a worthy wench; let me embrace thee.
Lords, why doe ye keep your seats? they are no places
For such as are offenders.
Though our ignorance
Of Cassilanes engagements might assuage
Severity of justice, yet to show
How no excuse should smooth a breach of Law,
I yield me to the trial of it.
So must I:
Great Prince of Cyprus, you are left
The only Moderator in this difference;
And as you are a Prince be a Protector
To woeful Candy.
What a Scene of misery
Hath thine obdurate frowardness (old man)
Drawn on thy Countries bosom? and for that
Thy proud ambition could not mount so high
As to be styled thy Countries only Patron,
Thy malice hath descended to the depth
Of hell, to be renowned in the Title
Of the destroyer? dost thou yet perceive
What curses all posterity will brand
Thy grave with? that at once hast robed this kingdom
Of honour and of safety.
Children yet unborn
Will stop their ears when thou art named.
The world will be too little to contain
The memory of this detested deed;
The Furies will abhor it.
What the sword
Could not enforce, your peevish thirst of honour
(A brave, cold, weak, imaginary fame)
Hath brought on Candy: Candy groans, not these
That are to die.
It is happiness enough
For them, that they shall not survive to see
The wounds wherewith thou stab the land that gave
Thee life and name.
It is Candy's wrack shall feel—
The mischief of your folly.
Pos. Annophill—
I will not be entreated.
Prithee Annophill.
Why would ye urge me to a mercy which
You in your self allow not?
It is the Law,
That if the party who complains, remit
The offender, he is freed: is it not so Lords?
Pos. It is so.
Antinous, By my shame observe
What a close witch-craft popular applause is:
I am awaked, and with clear eyes behold
The Lethargy wherein my reason long
Hath been be-charm'd: Live, live, my matchless son,
Blessed in thy fathers blessing; much more blessed
In thine own virtues: let me dew thy cheeks
With my unmanly tears: Rise, I forgive thee:
And good Antinous, if I shall be thy father
Forgive me: I can speak no more.
Dear Sir,
You new beget me now—Madam your pardon,
I heartily remit you.
I as freely
Discharge thee Cassilane.
My gracious Lords,
Repute me not a blemish to my Sex,
In that I strove to cure a desperate evil
With a more violent remedy: your lives,
Your honours are your own.
Then with consent
Be reconciled on all sides: Please you fathers
To take your places.
Let us again ascend,
With joy and thankfulness to heaven: And now
To other business Lords.
Two hours and more Sir,
The Senate hath been set.
And I not know it?
Who sits with them?
My Lord, the Prince of Cyprus.
Gaspero,
Why how comes that to pass?
Some weighty cause
I warrant you.
Now Lords the business? ha?
VVho's here, Erota?
Secretary doe your charge
Upon that Traitor.
Traitor?
Yes, Gonzalo, Traitor,
Of treason to the peace and state of Candy,
I doe arrest thee.
Me? thou dog?
With License
From this grave Senate, I arrest thee likewise
Of Treason to the State of Venice.
Ha?
Is Michael here? nay then I see
I am undone.
I shall not be your Queen,
Your Duchess, or your Empress.
Dull, dull brain.
O I am fooled?
Look Sir, do you know this hand?
Do you know this Seal? First (Lords) he writes to Venice,
To make a perfect league, during which time
He would in private keep some Troops in pay,
Bribe all the Sentinels throughout this kindom,
Corrupt the Captains; at a Banquet poison
The Prince, and greatest Peers, and in conclusion
Yield Candy slave to Venice.
Next, he contracted
With the Illustrious Princess, the Lady Erota,
In hope of marriage with her, to deliver
All the Venetian gallantry, and strength,
Upon their first arrival, to the mercy
Of her and Candy.
This is true Gonzalo.
Let it be true: what then?
My Lord Ambassador,
What's your demand?
As likes the State of Candy,
Either to sentence him as he deserves
Here, or to send him like a slave to Venice.
We shall advise upon it.
O the devils,
That had not thrust this trick into my pate—
A Politician fool? destruction, plague
Candy and Venice both.
Porp. Away with him.
Come sir, Isle see you safe. 
Lords, ever you part
Be witness to another change of wonder;
Antinous, now be bold, before this presence,
Freely to speak, whether or no I used
The humblest means affection could contrive,
To gain thy love.
Madam, I must confess it,
And ever am your servant.
Yes Antinous,
My servant, for my Lord thou shalt be never:
I here disclaim the interest thou had once
In my too passionate thoughts. Most noble Prince,
If yet a relic of thy wonted flames
Live warm within thy bosom, then I blush not
To offer up the assurance of my faith,
To thee that hast deserved it best.
O Madam,
You play with my calamity.
Let heaven
Record my truth for ever.
With more joy
Then I have words to utter, I accept it.
I also pawn you mine.
The man that in requital
Of noble and un-sought affection
Grows cruel, never loved, nor did Antinous.
Yet herein (Prince) ye are beholding to him;
For his neglect of me humbled a pride,
Which to a virtuous wife had been a Monster.
For which Isle rank him my deserving friend.
Much comfort dwell with you, as I could wish
To him I honour most.
O my Antinous,
My own, my own good son.
One suit I have to make.
To whom Fernando?
Lord Cassilane to you.
To me?
This Lady
Hath promised to be mine.
Your blessing sir;
Brother your love.
You cannot sir bestow her
On a more noble gentleman.
Say thou so?
Antinous I confirm it. Here Fernando,
Live both as one; she is thine.
And herein sister,
I honour you for your wise settled love.
This is a day of Triumph, all Contentions
Are happily accorded: Candy's peace
Secured, and Venice vowed a worthy friend. 

