SHamount, welcome; we have mist thee long,
Though absent but two days: I hope your sports
Answer your time and wishes.
Very nobly sir:
We found game worthy your delight my Lord,
It was so royal.
I've enough to hear on it,
Prithee bestow it upon me in discourse.
What is this Gentleman Cos? you are a Courtier,
Therefore know all their insides.
No farther then the Taffeta goes good Cos,
For the most part, which is indeed the best part
Of the most general inside: marry thus far
I can with boldness speak this ones mans Character,
And upon honour pass it for a true one;
He has that strength of many merit in him,
That it exceeds his Sovereigns power of gracing;
He's faithfully true to valour, that he hates
The man from Casars time, or farther off,
That ever took disgrace unrevenged:
And if he chance to read his abject story,
He tears his memory out, and holds it virtuous,
Not to let shame have so much life amongst us;
There is not such a curious piece of courage
Amongst mans fellowship, or one so jealous
Of honours loss, or reputations glory:
There's so much perfect, of his growing story.
It would make one dote on virtue as you tell it.
I have told it to much loss, believe it Cos.
How the Duke graces him? what is he brother?
Do you not yet know him? a vain-glorious coxcomb,
As proud as he that fell for it:
Set but aside his valour, no virtue,
Which is indeed, not fit for any Courtier;
And we his fellows are as good as he,
Perhaps as capable of favour too,
For one thing or another, if it were looked into:
Give me a man, were I a Sovereign now,
Has a good stroke at Tennis, and a stiff one,
Can play at Equinoctium with the Line,
As even as the thirteenth of September,
When day and night lye in a scale together:
Or may I thrive as I deserve at Billiards;
No otherwise at Chess, or at Primero:
These are the parts required, why not advanced?
Trust me, it was no less then excellent pleasure,
And I'm right glad it was thine. How fares our kinsman?
Who can resolve us best?
I can my Lord.
There if I had a pity without bounds,
It might be all bestowed — A man so lost
In the wild ways of passion, that he's sensible
Of nought but what torments him?
True my Lord,
He runs through all the Passions of mankind,
And shifts 'em strangely too: one while in love,
And that so violent, that for want of business,
He will court the very Prentice of a Laundress,
Though she have kib'd heals: and in's melancholy again,
He will not brooke an Empress, though thrice fairer
Then ever Maud was; or higher spirited
Then Cleopatra, or your English Countess:
Then on a sudden he's so merry again,
Out-laughs a waiting woman, before her first Child:
And turning of a hand, so angry—
'Has almost beat the Northern fellow blind;
That is for that use only; if that mood hold my Lord,
'Had need of a fresh man; I'll undertake,
He shall bruise three a month.
I pity him dearly:
And let it be your charge, with his kind brother,
To see his moods observed; let every passion
Be fed even to a surfeit, which in time
May breed a loathing: let him have enough
Of every object, that his sense is rapt with;
And being once glutted, then the taste of folly
Will come into his relish. 
I shall see
Your charge my Lord most faithfully effected:
And how does noble Shamount?
Never ill man
Until I hear of baseness, then I sicken,
I am the healthful'st man in the Kingdom else.
Be armed then for a fit, 
Here comes a fellow
Will make you sick at heart, if baseness do it.
Let me be gone: what is he?
Let me tell you first,
It can be but a qualm, pray stay it out sir,
Come, you've borne more then this.
Borne? never any thing
That was injurious.
Ha, I am far from that.
He looks as like a man as I have seen one:
What would you speak of him? speak well I prithee,
Even for humanities cause.
You'd have it truth though?
What else sir? I have no reason to wrong heaven
To favour nature; let her bear her own shame
If she be faulty.
Monstrous faulty there sir.
I'm ill at ease already.
Pray bear up sir.
I Prithee let me take him down with speed then.
Like a wild object that I would not look upon.
Then thus: he's one that will endure as much
As can be laid upon him.
That may be noble:
I'm kept too long from his acquaintance.
O sir,
Take heed of rash repentance, you're too forward
To find out virtue where it never settled:
Take the particulars first of what he endures;
Videlicet, Bastinadoes by the great.
How!
Thumps by the dozen, and your kicks by whole sale.
No more of him.
The twinges by the nostril he snuffs up,
And holds it the best remedy for sneazing.
Away.
Has been thrice switz't from seven a clock till nine,
Yet with a Cart-Horse stomach fell to break-fast,
Forgetful of his smart.
Nay, the disgrace on it;
There is no smart but that: base things are felt
More by their shames then hurts Sir, I know you not,
But that you live an injury to nature:
I'm heartily angry with you.
Pray give your blow or kick, and begone then:
For I ne'er saw you before, and indeed,
Have nothing to say to you, for I know you not.
Why would thou take a blow?
I would not sir,
Unless it were offered me; and if from an enemy—
I'd be loath to deny it from a stranger.
What, a blow?
Endure a blow? and shall he live that gives it?
Many a fair year—why not sir?
Let me wonder!
As full a man to see too, and as perfect—
I prithee live not long—
How?
Let me entreat it:
Thou dost not know what wrong thou dost mankind,
To walk so long here; not to dye betimes.
Let me advise thee, while thou hast to live here,
Even for mans honour sake, take not a blow more.
You should advise them not to strike me then sir,
For Isle take none I assure you, less then are given.
How fine would I preserve mans form from shame,
And cannot get it done? however sir,
I charge thee live not long.
This is worse then beating.
Of what profession art thou, tell me sir,
Besides a Taylor? for Isle know the truth.
A Taylor? I'm as a good a Gentleman—
Can show my arms and all.
How black and blew they are?
Is that your manifestation? upon pain
Of pounding thee to dust, assume not wrong fully,
The name of Gentleman, because I am one,
That must not let thee live.
I have done, I have done sir,
If there be any harm, beshrew the Herald,
I'em sure I ha not been so long a gentleman,
To make this anger: I have nothing no where,
But what I dearly pay for. 
Groom begone;
I never was so heart-sick yet of man.
Enter Lady, the Dukes sister, Lapets wife.
Here comes a cordial Sir from tother sex,
Able to make a dying face look cheerful.
The blessedness of Ladies —
You're well met sir.
The sight of you has put an evil from me,
Whose breath was able to make virtue sicken.
I'm glad I came so fortunately. What was it sit?
A thing that takes a blow, lives and eats after it,
In very good health; you have not seen the like Madam,
A monster worth your sixpence, lovely worth,
Speak low Sir; by all likely-hoods it is her husband,
That now bestowed a visitation on me. Farewell sir. 
Husband? is it possible that he has a wife?
Would any creature have him? it was some forced match,
If he were not kicked to the Church of the wedding day,
Isle never come at Court. Can be no otherwise:
Perhaps he was rich, speak Mistress Lapet, was it not so?
Nay, that's without all question.
O ho, he would not want kickers enough then;
If you are wise, I much suspect your honesty;
For wisdom never fastens constantly,
But upon merit: If you incline to fool,
You are alike unfit for his society;
Nay if it were not boldness in the man
That honours you, to advise you, troth his company
Should not be frequent with you.
It is good counsel sir.
Oh I am so careful where I reverence,
So just to goodness, and her precious purity,
I am as equally jealous, and as fearful,
That any undeserved stain might fall
Upon her sanctified whiteness, as of the sin
That comes by wilfulness.
Sir, I love your thoughts,
And honour you for your counsel and your care.
We are your servants.
Hoe's but a gentleman of the chamber, he might have kissed me:
Faith, where shall one find less curtsy, then at Court?
Say I have an undeserver to my husband:
That's ne'er the worse for him: well strange leapt men,
It is but a kiss lost, there'll more come again. 
Look who comes here sir, his love fit's upon him;
I know it, by that set smile, and those congees.
How courteous hoe's to nothing? which indeed,
Is the next kin to woman; only shadow
The elder Sister of the twain, because it is seen too.
See how it kisses the fore-finger still;
Which is the last edition, and being come
So near the thumb every Cobbler has got it?
What a ridiculous peace, humanity
Here makes it self?
Nay, good give leave a little sir,
You're so precise a manhood—
It afflicts me
When I behold unseemelinesse in an Image
So near the Godhood, it is an injury
To glorious Eternity.
Pray use patience sir.
I do confess it freely precious Lady,
And loves suit'is so, the longer it hangs
The worse it is; better cut off sweet Madam;
O that same drawing in your nether lip there,
Foreshewes no goodness Lady: make you question on it?
Shame on me but I love you.
Who is it sir,
You are at all this pains for? may I know her?
For thee thou fairest, yet the falsest woman,
That ever broke mans heart-strings.
How? how's this sir?
What, the old trick of Ladies? mans apparel,
Will it ne'er be left amongst you? steal from Court in it?
I see the fit grows stronger.
Pray let's talk a little.
I can endure no more.
Good, let us alone a little:
You are so exact a work: love light things somewhat sir.
They are all but shames.
What is it you'd say to me sir?
Can you be so forgetful to enquire it Lady?
Yes truly sir.
The more I admire your stintinesse:
What cause have I given you, illustrious Madam,
To play this strange part with me?
Cause enough,
Do but look back sir into your memory,
Your love to other women ô lewd man,
'Tas almost killed my heart, you see I'm changed with it,
I have lost the fashion of my Sex with grief on it,
When I have seen you courting of a Dowdy;
Compared with me, and kissing your fore-finger
To one of the black-guards Mistresses: would not this
Crack a poor Ladies heart, that believed love,
And waited for the comfort? but it was said sir,
A Lady of my hair cannot want pitying:
The Countries coming up, farewell to you sir.
Whither intend you sir?
A long journey sir:
The truth is, I'm with child, and go to travel.
With child? I never got it.
I heard you were busy
At the same time sir, and was loath to trouble you.
Why, are not you a whore then, excellent Madam?
O by no means, it was done sir in the state
Of my belief in you, and that quits me,
It lies upon your falshod.
Does it so?
You shall not carry her though sir, she's my contract.
I prithee thou four Elements ill brewed,
Torment none but thy self; away I say
Thou beast of passion, as the drunkard is
The beast of wine; dishonour to thy making,
Thou man in fragments.
Hear me precious Madam.
Kneel for thy wits to heaven.
Lady, I'll father it,
Who ere begot it: it is the course of greatness.
How virtue groans at this?
I'll raise the Court, but I'll stay your slight.
How wretched is that peace? 
He's the Dukes kinsman sir.
That cannot take a passion away sir,
Nor cut a fit, but one poor hour shorter,
He must endure as much as the poorest beggar,
That cannot change his money; there's the equality
In our impartial essence:
What's the news now? 
Your worthy brother sir, has left his charge,
And come to see you. 
O the noblest welcome
That ever came from man, meet thy deservings:
Methinkes I've all joys treasure in mine arms now,
You are so fortunate in prevention brother,
You always leave the answerer barren sir,
You comprehend in few words so much worth—
It is all too little for thee: come you are welcome,
So I include all: take especial knowledge pray,
Of this dear Gentleman, my absolute friend,
That loves a Soldier far above a Mistress,
Thou excellently faithful to 'em both.
But love to manhood, owns the purer troth. 
THere should be in this gallery—on they are here,
Pray sit down; believe me sir I'm weary.
It well becomes a Lady to complain a little
Of what she never feels: your walk was short Madam,
You can be but afraid of weariness;
Which well employs the softness of your Sex,
As for the thing it self, you never came to it.
You're wondrously well read in Ladies sir.
Shall I think such a creature as you Madam,
Was ever borne to feel pain, but in travel?
There's your full portion,
Besides a little toothache in the breeding,
Which a kind husband too, takes from you Madam.
But where do Ladies sir, find such kind husbands?
Perhaps you have heard
The Rhumaticke story of some loving Chandler now,
Or some such melting fellow, that you talk
So prodigal of men's kindness: I confess sir,
Many of those wives are happy, their ambition
Does reach no higher, then to love and ignorance,
Which makes an excellent husband, and a fond one:
Now sir, your great ones aim at height, and cunning,
And so are oft deceived, yet they must venture it;
For it is a Ladies contumely sir,
To have a Lord an Ignorant; then the worlds voice
Will deem her for a wanton ere she taste on it:
But to deceive a wise man, to whose circumspection,
The world resigns it self with all his envy;
It is less dishonour to us then to fall,
Because his believed wisdom keeps out all.
Would I were the man Lady, that should venture
His wisdom to your goodness.
You might fail
In the return, as many men have done sir:
I dare not justify what is to come of me,
Because I know it not, though I hope virtuously;
Marry what's past or present, I durst put
Into a good mans hand, Which if he take
Upon my word for good, it shall not cousin him.
No, nor her after?
It may hap so too sir:
A women's goodness, when she is a wise,
Lies much upon a mans desert, believe it sir,
If there be fault in her, Isle pawn my life on it,
It is first in him, if she were ever good,
That makes one; knowing not a husband yet,
Or what he may be, I promise no more virtues,
Then I may well perform, for that were cousinage.
Happy were he that had you with all fears,
That's my opinion, Lady.
What say you now sir?
Dare you give confidence to your own eyes?
Not yet I dare not.
No?
Scarce yet, or yet:
Although I see it is he. Why can a thing,
That's but my self divided be so false?
Nay doe but mark how the chair plays his part too:
How amorously it is bent.
Hell take thy bad thoughts,
For they are strange ones. Never take delight
To make a torment worse. Look on 'em heaven,
For that's a brother: send me a fair enemy,
And take him; for a fouler fiend there breathes not:
I will not sin, to think there's ill in her,
But what's of his producing.
Yet goodness, whose enclosure is but flesh,
Holds out oft times but sorely. But as black sir,
As ever kindred was: I hate mine own blood,
Because it is so near thine. Live without honesty,
And moist thou dye with an unmoistned eye,
And no tear follow thee. 
You're wondrous merry sir; I would your Brother heard you.
O my sister
I would not out of the way, let fall my words Lady,
Pore the precisest humour.
Yea, so close.
They are merry, that's the worst you can report on 'em;
They are neither dangerous, nor immodest.
So sir,
Shall I believe you, think you?
Who's this Lady?
O the Dukes Cousin; he came late from travel sir.
Respect belongs to him.
For as I said Lady,
They are merry that's the worst you can report of em:
They are neither dangerous, nor immodest.
How's this?
And there I think I left.
Abuses me.
Now to proceed, Lady; perhaps I swore I loved you,
If you believe me not, you're much the wiser.
He speaks still in my person, and derides me.
For I can cog with you.
You can all doe so.
We make no question of men's promptness that way.
And smile, &amp; wave a chair with comely grace too,
Play with our Tastle gently, and doe fine things,
That catch a Lady sooner then a virtue.
I never used to let man live so long
That wronged me.
Talk of Battalions, woo you in a skirmish;
Divine my mind to you Lady; and being sharp set,
Can court you at half pike: or name your weapon,
We cannot fail you Lady. 
Now he dies:
Were all succeeding hopes stored up within him.
O fie, in the Court sir?
I most dearly thank you sir.
Tic rage ill spent upon a passionate mad-man.
That shall not privilege him for ever sir:
A mad-man call you him? I have found too much reason
Sound in his injury to me, to believe him so.
If ever truth from mans lips may be held
In reputation with you, give this confidence;
And this his love-fit, which we observe still,
By's flattering and his fineness: at some other time,
He will go as slovenly as heart can wish.
The love and pity that his Highness shows to him,
Makes every man the more respectful of him:
Has never a passion, but is well provided for,
As this of Love, he is full fed in all;
His swinge as I may term it: have but patience,
And ye shall witness somewhat.
Still he mocks me:
Look you, in action, in behaviour sir;
Hold still the chair, with a grand mischief to you,
Or Isle set so much strength upon your heart sir—
I feel some power has restrained me Lady:
If it be sent from love, say, I obey it,
And ever keep a voice to welcome it.
THou Deity, swift winged love,
Sometimes below, sometimes above,
Little in shape, but great in power,
Thou that make a heart thy Tower,
And thy loop-holes, Ladies eyes,
From whence thou strik'st the fond and wise.
Did all the shafts in thy fair quiver
Stick fast in my ambitious liver;
Yet thy power would I adore,
And call upon thee to shoot more.
shoot more, shoot more.
I prithee hold though, sweet Celestial boy;
I'm not requited yet with love enough,
For the first arrow that I have within me:
And if thou be an equal archer Cupped,
Shoot this Lady, and twenty more for me.
Me sir?
Tic nothing but device, fear it not Lady;
You may be as good a maid after that shaft Madam,
As ere your mother was at twelve and half:
Tic like the boy that draws it, 'tas no sting yet.
Tic like the miserable maid that draws it—aside.
That sees no comfort yet, seeing him so passionate.
Strike me the Duchess of Valois in love with me,
With all the speed thou can, and two of her women.
You shall have more. 
Tell 'em I tarry for 'em.
Who would be angry with that walking trouble now
That hurts none but it self?
I am better quieted.
Isle have all women-kind struck in time for me
After thirteen once:
I see this Cupped will not let me want,
And let him spend his forty shafts an hour,
They shall be all found from the Dukes Exchequer;
He's come already.
O turn thy bow,
Thy power we feel and know,
Fair Cupped turn away thy bow:
They be those golden Arrows,
Bring Ladies all their sorrows,
And till there be more truth in men,
Never shoot at maid again.
What a felicity of whores are here?
And all my concubines, struck bleeding new:
A man can in his life time make but one woman,
But he may make his fifty Queens a month.
Have you remembered a Priest honest brothers?
Yes sister, and this is the young gentleman,
Make you no question of our faithfulness.
His growing shame sister provokes our care.
He must be taken in this fit of love Gentlemen.
What else sir? he shall do it.
Enough.
Be cheerful wench. 
Now by the stroke of pleasure, a deep oath,
Nimbly hopt Ladies all; what height they bear too?
A story higher then your common statures;
A little man must go up stairs to kiss 'em:
What a great space there is
Betwixt loves dining Chamber, and his Garret?
Isle try the utmost height—the Garret stoops methinkes;
The rooms are made all bending, I see that,
And not so high as a man takes 'em for.
Now if you'll follow me sir, I've that power,
To make them follow you.
Are they all shot?
All, all sir, every mothers daughter of 'em.
Then there's no fear of following; if they be once shot,
They'll follow a man to the devil—As for you sir—
Me sir?
Nay sweet sir.
A noise, a threatening; did you not hear it sir?
Without regard sir, so would I hear you.
This must come to something, never talk of that Sir,
You never saw it otherwise.
Nay dear merit —
Me above all men?
Troth you wrong your anger.
I will be armed my honourable Lecher.
O fie sweet sir.
That devours women's honesties by lumps,
And never chawst thy pleasure.
What do you mean sir?
What does he mean t'ingrosse all to himself?
There's others love a whore, as well as he sir.
Oh and that be part of the fury, we have a City
Is very well provided for that case;
Let him alone with her, sir we have women
Are very charitable to proper men,
And to a Soldier that has all his limbs;
Marry the sick and lame gets not a penny:
Right women's charity, and the husbands follow't too:
Here comes his highness sir.
Isle walk to cool my self. 
Who's that?
The brother of Shamont.
He's Brother then
To all the Courts love, they that love discreetly,
And place their friendliness upon desert:
As for the rest, that with a double face
Look upon merit, much like fortunes visage,
That looks two ways, both to lifes calms and storms,
Isle so provide for him, chiefly for him,
He shall not wish their loves, nor dread their envies.
And here comes my Shamont. 
That Ladies virtues are my only joys,
And he to offer to lay siege to them?
Shamont.
Her goodness is my pride; in all discourses,
As often as I here rash tongued gallants,
Speak rudely of a woman, presently
I give in but her name, and they are all silent:
O who would lose this benefit?
Come hither sir.
It is like the gift of healing, but diviner;
For that but cures diseases in the body,
This works a cure on fame, on reputation:
The noblest piece of Surgery upon earth.
Shamont; he minds me not.
A Brother do it?
Shamont I say. Gives him a touch with his switch.
Ha?
If he be mortal, by this hand he perishes; 
Unless it be a stroke from heaven, he dies for it.
Why, how now sir? it was I.
The more's my misery.
Why, what's the matter prithee?
Can you ask it sir?
No man else should; stood forty lives before him
By this I would have op'd my way to him;
It could not be you sir, excuse him not,
What ere he be, as you're dear to honour,
That I may find my peace again.
Forbear I say.
Upon my love to truth, it was none but I.
Still miserable?
Come, come, what ails you sir?
Never sate shame cooling so long upon me,
Without a satisfaction in revenge,
And heaven has made it here a sin to wish it.
Hark you sir?
O you've undone me.
How?
Cruelly undone me;
I have lost my peace, and reputation by you:
Sir pardon me, I can never love you more. 
What language call you this sirs?
Truth my Lord, I've seldom heard a stranger.—
He is a man of a most curious valour,
Wondrous precise, and punctual in that virtue.
But why to me so punctual? my last thought
Was most entirely fixed on his advancement:
Why, I came now to put him in possession
Of his fair fortunes: what a mis-conceiver it is?
And from a Gentleman of our Chamber merely,
Made him vice-admiral; I was settled in it,
I love him next to health: call him Gentlemen;
Why would not you, or you have taken as much,
And never murmured? 
Troth, I think we should my Lord,
And there's a fellow walks about the Court,
Would take a hundred of 'em.
I hate you all for it,
And rather praise his high pitched fortitude,
Though in extremes for niceness: now I think on it,
I would I had never done it.—Now sir, where is he?
His suit is only sit to be excused.
He shall not be excused, I love him dearelier:
Say we entreat him; go, he must not leave us. 
So virtue bless me, I ne'er knew him paralleled;
Why, he's more precious to me now, then ever.
With much fair language, w'ave brought him?
Thanks—Where is he?
Yonder sir.
Come forward man.
Pray pardon me, I'm ashamed to be seen sir.
Was ever such a touchy man heard of?
Prithee come nearer.
More into the light?
Put not such cruelty into your requests my Lord,
First to disgrace me publicly, and then draw me
Into men's eyesight, with the shame yet hot
Upon my reputation.
What disgrace sir?
What?
Such as there can be no forgiveness for,
That I can find in honour.
That's most strange sir.
Yet I have seartch'd my bosom to find one,
And wresled with my inclination,
But 't will not be: would you had kilt me sir,
With what an ease had I forgiven you then?
But to endure a stroke from any hand
Under a punishing Angels, which is justice,
Honour disclame that man, for my part chiefly:
Had it been yet the malice of your sword.
Though it had cleft me, 'thad been noble to me;
You should have found my thanks paid in a smile
If I had fell unworded; but to shame me,
With the correction that your horse should have,
Were you ten thousand times my royal Lord,
I cannot love you never, nor desire to serve you more.
If your drum call me. I am vowed to valour,
But peace shall never know me yours again,
Because I've lost mine own, I speak to dye sir;
Would you were gracious that way to take off shame,
With the same swiftness as you power it on:
And since it is not in the power of Monarchs
To make a Gentleman, which is a substance
Only begot of merit, they should be careful
Not to destroy the worth of one so rare,
Which neither they can make; nor lost, repair. 
You've set a fair light sir before my judgement,
Which burns with wondrous clearness; I acknowledge it,
And your worth with it: but then sir, my love,
My love — what gone again?
And full of scorn my Lord.
That language will undo the man that keeps it,
Who knows no difference twixt contempt and manhood.
Upon your love to goodness, gentlemen, 
Let me not lose him long: how now?
The game's at height my Lord.
Confound both, thee and it: hence break it off;
He hates me brings me news of any pleasure:
I felt not such a conflict since I could;
Distinguish betwixt worthiness and blood 
I I heartily commend your project Gentlemen,
It was wise and virtuous.
It was for the safety
Of precious honour sir, which near blood binds us to:
He promised the poor easy fool there marriage,
There was a good maiden-head lost in the belief on it,
Beshrew her hasty confidence.
O no more sir,
You make her weep again; alas poor Cupped:
Shall she not shift her self?
O by no means sir:
We dare not have her seen yet, all the while
She keeps this shape, it is but thought device,
And she may follow him so without suspicion,
To see if she can draw all his wilde passions,
To one point only, and that's love, the maine point:
So far his highness grants, and gave at first,
Large approbation to the quick conceit,
Which then was quick indeed.
You make her blush insooth.
I fear it is more the flag of shame, then grace sir.
They both give but one kind of colour sir:
If it be bashfulness in that kind taken,
It is the same with grace; and there she weeps again.
In truth you're too hard, much, much too bitter sir,
Unless you mean to have her weep her eyes out,
To play a Cupped truly.
Come, have done then:
We should all fear to sin first; for it is certain,
When it is once lodged, though entertained in mirth,
It must be wept out, if it ere come forth.
Now it is so well, I'll leave you.
Faithfully welcome sir,
Go Cupped to your charge; hoe's your own now;
If he want love, none will be blamed but you.
The strangest marriage, and unfortunat'st Bride
That ever humane memory contained;
I cannot be my self for it. 
Oh Gentlemen? 
How now sir, what's the matter?
His melancholy passion is half spent already,
Then comes his angry fit at the very tail on it,
Then comes in my pain gentlemen; 'has beat me even to a Cullis.
I am nothing, right worshipful, but very pap,
And jelly: I have no bones, my body's all one business,
They talk of ribs, &amp; chines most freely abroad in the world,
Why, I have no such thing; who ever lives to see me dead
Gentlemen, shall find me all mummy good to fill galipots
And long dildo glasses: I shall not have a bone to throw
At a dog.
Alas poor vassal, how he goes?
O Gentlemen,
I am unjoynted, do but think of that:
My breast is beat into my maw, that what I eat,
I am fine to take it in all at mouth with spoons;
A lamentable hearing; and it is well known, my belly
Is driven into my back.
I earned four Crowns a month, most dearly Gentlemen,
And one he must have when the fit's upon him,
The privy purse allows it, and it is thriftiness,
He would break else some forty pounds in casements,
And in five hundred years undo the Kingdom:
I have cast it up to a quarrel.
There's a fellow kicked about court, I would
He had his place brother, but for one fit of his indignation.
And suddenly I have thought upon a means for it.
I Prithee how?
It is but preferring Brother
This stockfish to his service, with a letter
Of commendations, the same way he wishes it,
And then you win his heart: for of my knowledge
He has laid waite this half year for a fellow
That will be beaten; and with a safe conscience
We may commend the carriage of this man in it;
Now servants he has kept, lusty tall feeders,
But they have beat him, and turned themselves away:
Now one that would endure, is like to stay,
And get good wages of him; and the service too
Is ten times milder Brother, I would not wish it else.
I see the fellow has a sore crushed body,
And the more need he has to be kicked at ease.
I sweet Gentlemen, a kick of ease, send me to such a Master.
No more I say, we have one for thee, a soft footed Master,
One that wears wool in's toes.
O Gentlemen, soft garments may you wear,
Soft skins may you wed,
But as plump as pillows, both for white and red.
And now will I reveal a secret to you,
Since you provide for my poor flesh so tenderly,
'Has hired mere Rogues, out of his Chamber window,
To beat the Soldier, Monsieur Shamonts Brother.
That nothing concerns us sir.
For no cause Gentlemen,
Unless it be for wearing shoulder points,
With longer taggs then his.
Is not that somewhat?
Billakin sir, the difference of long taggs,
Has cost many a mans life, and advanced other some,
Come follow me.
See what a gull am I:
Oh every man in his profession;
I know a thumpe now, as juditiously,
As the proudest he that walks, I'll except none;
Come to a tag, how short I fall? I'm gone. 
I have been ruminating with my self,
What honour a man loses by a kick:
Why, what's a kick? the fury of a foot,
Whose indignation commonly is stamped
Upon the hinder quarter of a man;
Which is a place very unfit for honour,
The world will confess so much:
Then what disgrace I pray, does that part suffer
Where honour never comes, I'd fine know that?
This being well forced, and urged, may have the power
To move most Gallants to take kicks in time,
And spurn out the duelloes out of the kingdom,
For they that stand upon their honour most,
When they conceive there is no honour lost,
As by a table that I have invented
For that purpose alone, shall appear plainly,
Which shows the vanity of all blows at large,
And with what ease they may be took of all sides,
Numbering but twice one the Letters Patience
From C.P. to E. I doubt not but in small time
To see a dissolution of all bloodshed,
If the Reformed Kick do but once get up:
For what a lamentable folly it is,
If we observ't, for every little justly,
Which is but the ninth part of a sound thump,
In our meek computation, we must fight forsooth, yes,
If kill, I'm hang'; if I be killed my self,
I dye for it also: is not this trim wisdom?
Now for the Con, a man may be well beaten,
Yet pass away his fourscore years smooth after:
I had a father did it, and to my power
I will not be behind him. 
O well met.
Now a fine punch or two, I look for it duly.
I've been to seek you.
Let me know your lodging sir,
I'll come to you once a day, and use your pleasure sir.
I'm made the fittest man for thy Society:
I'll live and dye with thee: come show me a Chamber;
There is no house but thine, but only thine,
That's fit to cover me: I've took a blow sirrah.
I would you had indeed: why, you may see sir;
You'll all come to it in time, when my booke's out.
Since I did see thee last, I've took a blow.
Pha sir that's nothing; I have took forty since.
What? and I charged thee thou should not?
I sir, you might charge your pleasure,
But they would gived me, whether I would or no.
Oh I walk without my peace, I've no companion now;
Prithee resolve me, for I cannot ask
A man more beaten to experience,
Then thou art in this kind, what manner of blow
Is held the most disgraceful, or distasteful?
For thou dost only censure 'em by the hurt,
Not by the shame they do thee: yet having felt
Abuses of all kinds, thou may deliver,
Though't be by chance, the most injurious one.
You put me to it sir; but to tell you truth,
They are all as one with me, little exception.
That little may do much, let's have it from you.
With all the speed I may: first then, and foremost,
I hold so reverently of the Bastinado sir,
That if it were the dearest friend in the world,
I'd put it into his hand.
Go too, I'll pass that then.
You're the more happy sir,
Would I were past it too:
But being accustomed to it, It is the better carried.
Will you forward?
Then there's your sowce, your wherrit, and your dowst,
Tuggs on the hair, your bob of the lips, a whelp on it,
I ne'er could find much difference: Now your thumpe,
A thing derived first from your Hemp-beaters,
Takes a mans wind away, most spitefully:
There's nothing that destroys a Colic like it,
For it leaves no wind in the body.
On sir, on.
Pray give me leave, I'm out of breath with thinking ont.
This is far off yet.
For the twinge byth' nose,
It is certainly unsightly, so my tables says,
But helps against the head-ache, wondrous strangely.
Is it possible?
O your crushed nostrils slakes your opilation
And makes your pent powers flush to wholesome sneezes.
I never thought there had been half that virtue
In a wrung nose before.
O plenitude sir:
Now come we lower, to our modern kick,
Which has been mightily in use of late,
Since our young men drank Coltsfoot: and I grant you,
It is a most scornful wrong, cause the foot plays it;
But mark again, how we that take it, requite it
With the like scorn, for we receive it backward;
And can there be a worse disgrace retorted?
And is this all?
All but a lug byth' ear,
Or such a trifle.
Happy sufferer,
All this is nothing to the wrong I bear:
I see the worst disgrace, thou never felt yet;
It is so far from thee, thou can not think on it;
Nor dare I let thee know, it is so abject.
I would you would though, that I might prepare for it,
For I shall have it at one time or another:
If it be a thwack, I make account of that;
There's no new fashioned swappe that ere came up yet,
But I've the first on 'em, I thank 'em for it.
Hast thou enquired?
But Can hear nothing Madam.
If there be but so much substance in thee
To make a shelter for a man disgraced,
Hide my departure from that glorious woman
That comes with all perfection about her:
So noble, that I dare not be seen of her,
Since shame took hold of me: upon thy life
No mention of me.
I'll cut out my tongue first,
Before I'll loose my life, there's more belongs to it.
See there's a Gentleman, enquire of him.
For Monsieur Shamont Madam?
For whom else sir?
Why, this fellow dares not see him.
How?
Shamont Madam?
His very name's worse then a fever to him,
And when he cries, there's nothing stils him sooner;
Madam, your Page of thirteen is to hard for him,
It was trid in the wood-yard.
Alas poor grieved Merit!
What is become of him? if he one fail,
Virtue shall find small friendship: farewell then
To Ladies words, for any hope in men,
He loved for goodness, not for Wealth, or lust,
After the worlds foul dotage, he ne'er courted
The body but the beauty of the mind,
A thing which common courtship never thinks on:
All his affections were so sweet and fair,
There is no hope for fame if he despair. 
Good morrow to you again most heartily sir,
Cry you mercy I heard you not, I was somewhat busy.
He takes it as familiarly, as an Ave,
Or precious salutation: I was sick till I had one,
Because I am so used to it.
How ever you deserve, your friends &amp; mine, here
Give you large commendations in this Letter,
They say you will endure well.
I'd be loath
To prove 'em liers: I've endured as much
As mortal pen and Ink can set me down for.
Say you me so?
I know and feel it so sir,
I have it under black and white already;
I need no pen to paint me out.
He fits me,
And hits my wishes pat, pat: I was ne'er
In possibility to be better manned,
For he's half lamed already, I see it plain,
But take no notice on it, for fear I make
The Rascal proud, and dear, to advance his wages;
First let me grow into particulars with you;
What have you endured of worth? let me hear.
Marry sir, I'm almost beaten blind.
That's pretty well for a beginning,
But many a milhorse has endured as much.
Shame of the millers heart for his unkindness then.
Well sir, what then?
I've been twice thrown down stairs, just before supper.
Puh, so have I, that's nothing.
I but sir,
Was yours pray before supper?
There thou possessed me.
I marry, that's it, 't'ad been less grief to me,
Had I but filed my belly, and then tumbled,
But to be flung down fasting, there's the dolor.
It would have grieved me, that indeed: proceed sir.
I have been plucked &amp; tugged bith' hair of the head
About a gallery, half an Acre long.
Yes, that's a good one, I must needs confess,
A principal good one that, an absolute good one,
I have bin trod upon, and spurned about,
But never tugged byth' hair, I thank my fates.
O it is a spiteful pain.
Peace, never speak on it,
For putting men in mind on it.
To conclude,
I'm burst sir: my belly will hold no meat.
No? that makes amends for all.
Unlesse't be puddings,
Or such fast food, any loose thing beguiles me, I'm ne'er the better for it.
Sheepheads will stay with thee?
Yes sir, or Chaldrons.
Very well sir:
Any your burst fellows must take heed of surfeits:
Strange things it seems, you have endured;
Too true sir.
But now the question is, what you will endure
Hereafter in my service?
Any thing
That shall be reason sir, for I'm but froth;
Much like a thing new calv'd, or come more nearer sir,
You've seen a Cluster of Frog-spawns in April,
Even such a starch am I, as weak and tender
As a green woman yet.
Now I know this,
I will be very gently angry with thee,
And kick thee carefully.
O I sweet sir.
Peace, when thou art offered well, lest I begin now.
Your friends and mine have writ here for your truth,
They'll pass their words themselves, and I must meet 'em.
Then have you all: 
As for my honesty there is no fear of that,
For I have ne'er a whole bone about me, 
Think upon love, which makes all creatures handsome,
Seemly for ey-sight; go not so disfusedly,
There are great Ladies purpose sir to visit you.
Grand plagues, shut in my casements, that the breaths
Of their Coach-mares reek not into my Nostrils;
Those beasts are but a kind of Bawdy fore-runners.
It is not well with you,
When you speak ill of fair Ladies.
Fair mischiefs, give me a nest of Owls, and take 'em;
Happy is he say I, whose window opens
To a browne Bakers chimney, he shall be sure there
To hear the Bird sometimes after twilight:
What a fine thing it is me thinks to have our garments
Sit loose upon us thus, thus careleslely,
It is more manly, and more mortifying;
For w'are so much the readier for our shrouds:
For how ridiculous were it, to have death come,
And take a fellow pinned up like a Mistress?
About his neck a Ruff, like a pinched Lantern,
Which Schoole-boyes make in winter; and his doublet
So close and pent, as if he feared one prison
Would not be strong enough, to keep his soul in;
Butt's Tailor makes another:
And trust me, for I know it when I loved Cupped,
He does endure much pain, for the poor praise
Of a neat sitting suit.
One may be handsome sir,
And yet not pained, nor proud.
There you lie Cupped,
As bad as Mercury: there is no handsomeness,
But has a wash of Pride and Luxury,
And you go there too Cupped. Away dissembler,
Thou take the deeds part which befooles us all;
Thy Arrow heads shoot out sinners: hence away,
And after thee Isle send a powerful charm,
Shall banish thee for ever.
Never, never,
I am too sure thine own. 
HEnce all you vain Delights,
As short as are the nights,
Wherein you spend your folly,
Ther's nought in this life sweet,
If man were wise to see it,
But only Melancholy,
O sweetest melancholy.
Welcome folded Arms, and fixed eyes,
A sigh that piercing mortifies,
A look that's fastened to the ground,
A tongue chained up without a sound.
Fountain heads, and pithless Groves,
Places which pale passion loves:
Moon-light walks, when all the fowls
Are warmly housed, save Bats and Owls;
A mid-night Bell, a parting groan,
These are the sounds we feed upon;
Then stretch our bones in a still gloomy valley,
Nothing's so dainty sweet as lovely melancholy.
So, so, the Wood-cock's gin'd;
Keep this door fast brother.
Isle warrant this.
Isle go incense him instantly;
I know the way to it.
Will it not be too soon think you,
And make two fits break into one?
Pah, no, no; The tail of his melancho
Is always the head of his anger, and follows as close,
As the Report follows the powder.
This is the appointed place, and the hour struck,
If I can get security for's truth,
Isle never mind his honesty: poor worm,
I durst lay him by my wife, which is a benefit
Which many masters have not: I shall have no maid
Now got with child, but what I get my self,
And that's no small felicity: In most places
They are got by the men, and put upon the Masters:
Nor shall I be resisted when I strike,
For he can hardly stand; these are great blessings.
I want my food, deliver me a varlet. 
How now: from whence comes that?
I am allowed a Carcass to insult on;
Whore's the villain?
He means not me I hope.
My maintenance rascals; my Bulk, my exhibition.
Bless us all,
What names' are these? would I were gone again.
A Curse upon thee for a slave,
Art thou here, and heard me rave?
Fly not sparkles from mine eye,
To show my indignation ny?
Am I not all foam, and fire?
With voice as hoarse, as a Towne-crier?
How my back ops and shuts together,
With fury, as old men's with weather?
Coldest thou not hear my teeth knash hither?
No truly sir, I thought it had been a Squirrel,
Shaving a Hazle-nut.
Death, hell, fiends, and darkness,
I will thrash thy mangy carcass.
O sweet sir.
There cannot be too many Tortures,
Spent upon those lousy Quarters.
Hold, oh. 
Thy bones shall rue, thy bones shall rue,
Thou nafly, scurvy, mongrel Toad, 
Mischief on thee;
Light upon thee,
All the plagues
That can confound thee
Or did ever reign abroad:
Better a thousand lives it cost,
Then have brave Anger spilt or lost. 
May I open mine eyes yet, and safely peep?
Isle try a groan first—oh—Nay then hoe's gone.
There was no other policy but to dye,
He would have made me else. Ribs are you sore?
I was ne'er beaten to a tune before.
Lapet.
Again? 
Look, look, hoe's flat again,
And stretched out like a Coarse a handful longer
Then he walks trust me brother. Why Lapet.
I hold my life we shall not get him speak now.
Monsieur Lapet; it must be a privy token,
If any thing fetch him, hoe's so far gone.
We come to pass our words for your mans truth.
O gentlemen you're welcome: I have been thrashed i'faith.
How? thrashed sir?
Never was Shrove-tuesday Bird
So cudgeled gentlemen.
Pray how? by whom sir?
Nay that I know not.
Not who did this wrong?
Only a thing came like a walking song.
What beaten with a Song?
Never more tightly, gentlemen:
Such crotchets happen now and then, methinks,
He that endures well, of all waters drinks. 
YEs, yes, this was a Madman, sir, with you,
A passionate Madman.
Who would have looked for this sir?
And must be privileged? a pox privilege him:
I was never so dry beaten since I was borne,
And by a litter of rogues, mere rogues, the whole twenty
Had not above nine elbows amongst 'em all too:
And the most part of those left-handed rascals,
The very vomit, Sir, of hospitals,
Bridewells, and Spittle-houses; such nasty smellers,
That if they'd been unfurnished of Club-Trunchions,
They might have cudgeled me with their very stinks,
It was so strong, and sturdy: and shall this,
This filthy injury, be set off with madness?
Nay take your own bloods council sir, hereafter,
Isle deal no further in it: if you remember,
It was not come to blows, when I advised you.
No, but I ever said, it would come to something,
And it is upon me, thank him: were he kin
To all the mighty Emperors upon earth,
He has not now in life three hours to reckon;
I watch but a free time.
Your noble brother, sir, Isle leave you now. 
Soldier I would I could persuade my thoughts
From thinking thee a brother, as I can
My tongue from naming on it: thou hast no friend here,
But fortune and thy own strength, trust to them.
How? what's the incitement, sir?
Treachery to virtue;
Thy treachery, thy faithless circumvention:
Has Honour so few daughters, never fewer,
And must thou aim thy treachery at the best?
The very front of virtue? that blessed Lady? the Dukes sister?
Created more for admirations cause,
Then for loves ends; whose excellence sparkles
More in divinity, then mortal beauty;
And as much difference twixt her mind and body,
As twixt this earths poor center and the Sun:
And could thou be so injurious to fair goodness,
Once to attempt to court her down to frailty?
Or put her but in mind that there is weakness,
Sin, and desire, which she should never hear of?
Wretch, thou'st committed worse then Sacrilege,
In the attempting on it, and oughtst to dye for it.
I rather ought to doe my best, to live, sir;
Provoke me not; for I've a wrong sits on me,
That makes me apt for mischief; I shall lose
All respects suddenly of friendship, Brother-hood,
Or any sound that way.
But 'ware me most;
For I come with a two-edg'd injury;
Both my disgrace, and thy apparent falsehood,
Which must be dangerous.
I courted her, sir:
Love starve me with delays when I confess it not.
There's nothing then but death
Can be a penance fit for that confession.
But far from any vicious taint.
O sir,
Vice is a mighty stranger grown to courtship.
Nay then the fury of my wrong light on thee.
Forbear, the Duke's at hand.
Here, hard at hand, upon my reputation.
I must doe something now. 
Isle follow you close sir.
We must entreat you must not; for the Duke
Desires some conference with you.
Let me go,
As you're gentlemen.
Faith we dare not sir.
Dare ye be false to honour, and yet dare not
Doe a man justice? give me leave—
Good sweet sir.
He has sent twice for you.
Is this brave, or manly?
I prithee be conformed.
'Death— 
Peace, hoe's come in truth.
Oh have you betrayed me to my shame afresh?
How am I bound to loath you?
Shamont, welcome,
I sent twice.
But my Lord, he never heard on it.
Pray pardon him, for his falseness, I did Sir,
Both times; I'd rather be found rude then faithless.
I love that bluntness dearly: he's no vice,
But is more manly then some others virtue,
That lets it out only for show or profit.
Will it please you quit me sir, I've urgent business?
Come, you're so hasty now: I sent for you
To a better end.
And if it be an end,
Better or worse, I thank your goodness for it.
I've ever kept that bounty in condition,
And thankfulness in blood, which well becomes
Both Prince and Subject, that where any wrong
Bears my impression, or the hasty figure
Of my repented anger, I'm a Law
Even to my self, and doom my self most strictly
To Justice, and a noble satisfaction:
So that, what you in tenderness of honour,
Conceive to be loss to you, which is nothing
But curious opinion, Isle restore again,
Although I give you the best part of Genoa,
And take to boot but thanks for your amends.
O miserable satisfaction,
Ten times more wretched then the wrong it self;
Never was ill better made good with worse:
Shall it be said that my posterity
Shall live the sole heirs of their fathers shame?
And raise their wealth and glory from my stripes?
You have provided nobly bounteous sir,
For my disgrace, to make it live for ever,
Out-lasting Brass or Marble:
This is my fears construction, and a deep one,
Which neither argument nor time can alter:
Yet I durst swear, I wrong your goodness in it sir,
And the most fair intent on it, which I reverence
With admiration, that in you a Prince,
Should be so sweet and temperate a condition,
To offer to restore where you may ruin,
And do it with justice, and in me a servant,
So harsh a disposition, that I cannot
Forgive where I should honour, and am bound to it.
But I have ever had that curiosity
In blood, and tenderness of reputation,
Such an antipathy against a blow,
I cannot speak the rest: Good sir discharge me,
It is not fit that I should serve you more,
Nor come so near you; I'm made now for privacy,
And a retired condition, that's my suit,
To part from Court for ever, my last suit.
And as you profess bounty, grant me that, Sir.
I would deny thee nothing.
Health reward you; sir. 
He's gone again already, and takes hold
Of any opportunity, not riches
Can purchase him, nor honours, peaceably,
And force were brutish: what a great word's gone with him,
And but a gentleman? well, for his sake,
Isle ne'er offend more those I cannot make:
They were his words, and shall be dear to memory.
Say I desire to see him once again;
Yet stay, hoe's so well forward of his peace,
It were pity to disturb him: he would groan
Like a soul fetched again; and that were injury,
And I've wronged his degree too much already.
Call forth the gentlemen of our chamber instantly.
I shall my Lord. 
I may forget again,
And therefore will prevent: The strain of this
Troubles me so, one would not hazard more:
Your will my Lord?
Yes; I discharge you all.
My Lord—
Your places shall be otherwise disposed of.
Why sir?
Reply not, I dismiss you all:
You're gentlemen, your words will find you fortunes;
Nor shall your farewell tax me of ingratitude,
Isle give you all noble remembrances,
As testimonies against reproach and malice,
That you departed loved.
This is most strange, sir.
But how is your grace furnished, these dismised?
Seek me out Grooms.
Men more insensible of reputation,
Less curious and precise in terms of honour,
That if my anger chance let fall a stroke,
As we are all subject to impetuous passions,
Yet it may pass unmurmur'd, undisputed,
And not with braver fury prosecuted. 
It shall be done, my Lord.
Know you the cause sir?
Not I kind gentlemen, but by conjectures,
And so much shall be yours, when you please.
Thanks sir.
We shall in the mean time think our selves guilty
Of some foul fault, through ignorance committed.
No, it is not that, nor that way.
For my part.
I shall be dis-inherited, I knew so much.
Why sir, for what?
My sire's of a strange humour,
He will form faults for me, and then swear 'em mine,
And commonly the first begins with lechery.
He knows his own youths trespass.
Before you go,
Isle come and take my leave, and tell you all sirs.
Thou were it ever just and kind. 
That's my poor virtue sir,
And parcel valiant; but it's hard to be perfect:
The choosing of these fellows now will puzzle me,
Horribly puzzle me; and there's no judgement,
Goes true upon mans out-side, there's the mischief:
He must be touched, and tried, for gold or dross;
There is no other way for it, and that's dangerous too;
But since I'm put in trust, I will attempt it:
The Duke shall keep one daring man about him: 
Soft, who comes here? a pretty bravery this:
Every one goes so like a gentleman,
It is hard to find a difference, but byth' touch.
Isle try your mettle sure.
Why what doe you mean sir?
Nay, and you understand it not, I doe not.
Yes, would you should well know,
I understand it for a box of the ear Sir.
And of my troth, that's all I gave it for.
It were best it be so.
This is a brave Coward,
A jolly threatening Coward; he shall be Captain:
Sir, let me meet you an hour hence in the Lobby.
Meet you? the world might laugh at me then i'faith.
Lay by your scorn &amp; pride, the're scurvy qualities,
And meet me, or Isle hox you while I have you,
And carry you gambril'd thither like a Mutton.
Nay, and you be in earnest, here's my hand
I will not fail you.
It is for your own good.
Away.
Too much for your own good, sir, a pox on you.
I prithee curse me all day long so.
Hang you.
Isle make him mad; hoe's loath to curse too much to me;
Indeed I never yet took box of the ear,
But it redounded, I must needs say so—
Will you be gone?
Curse, curse, and then I go.
Look how he grins, I've angered him to the kidneys. 
Was ever such a prigging coxcomb seen?
One might have beat him dumb now in this humour,
And he would have grind it out still: 
O here's one made to my hand,
Methinks looks like a Craven;
Less pains will serve his trial: some slight justly.
How? take you that sir:
And if that content you not—
Yes very well sir, I desire no more.
I think you need not;
For you have not lost by it. 
Who would have thought this would have proved a gentleman?
Isle never trust long chins and little legs again,
Isle know 'em sure for gentlemen hereafter:
A gristle but in show, but gave his cuff
With such a fetch, and reach of gentry,
As if h'had had his arms before the flood;
I have took a villainous hard task upon me;
Now I begin to have a feeling on it.
O here comes a tried piece, now, the reformed kick.
The millions of punches, spurns, and nips
That he has endured? his Buttock's all black Lead,
He 's half a Negro back-ward; he was past a Spaniard
In eighty eight, and more Egyptian-like;
His Table and his Book come both out shortly,
And all the Cowards in the Town expect it;
So, if I fail of my full number now,
I shall be sure to find 'em at Church corners,
Where Dives, and the suffering Ballads hang.
Well, since thou art of so mild a temper,
Of so meek a spirit, thou moist live with me,
Till better times doe smile on thy deserts.
I am glad I am got home again.
I am happy in your service, sir,
You'll keep me from the Hospital.
So, bring me the last proof, this is corrected.
I, you're too full of your correction, sir.
Look I have perfect Books within this half hour.
Yes sir.
Bid him put all the Thumps in Pica Roman,
And with great Tees, (you vermin) as Thumps should be.
Then in what Letter will you have your Kicks?
All in Italica, your Backward blows
All in Italica, you Hermophrodite:
When shall I teach you wit?
O let it alone,
Till you have some your self sir.
You mumble?
The Victuals are locked up;
I'm kept from mumbling. 
He prints my Blows upon pot-paper too, the rogue,
Which had been proper for some drunken Pamphlet.
Monsieur Lapet? how the world rings of your sir?
Your name sounds far and near.
A good report it bears, for an enduring name—
What luck have you sir?
Why, what's the matter?
I'm but thinking on it.
I've heard you wish this five year for a place.
Now there's one fallen, and freely without money too;
And empty yet, and yet you cannot hav't.
No? what's the reason? Isle give money for it,
Rather then go without sir.
That's not it, sir;
The troth is, there's no gentleman must have it
Either for love or money: it is decreed so;
I was heartily sorry when I thought upon you,
Had you not been a gentleman I had fitted you.
Who I a gentleman? a pox I'm none, sir.
How?
How? why did you ever think I was?
What? not a gentleman?
I would you would put it upon me i'faith.
Did not my Grand-father cry Coney-skins?
My father Aquavitae? a hot gentleman:
All this I speak on in your time and memory too;
Only a rich Uncle died and left me chattels,
You know all this so well too—
Pray excuse me, sir, have not you Arms?
Yes, a poor couple here.
That serve to thrust in wildfowl.
Heralds Arms,
Symbols of gentry, sir: you know my meaning;
They've been shown and seen.
They have.
I fex have they.
Why I confess, at my wives instigation once,
(As women love these Heralds kickshaws naturally)
I bought 'em: but what are they think you? puffs.
Why, that's proper to your name being Lapet.
Which is La fart, after the english letter.
The Herald, sir, had much a doe to find it.
And can you blame him?
Why it is the only thing that puzzles the devil.
At last he looked upon my name again,
And having well compared it, this he gave me,
The two Cholliques playing upon a wind instrument.
An excellent proper one: but I pray tell me,
How does he express the Cholliques?
They are hard things.
The Cholliques? with hot trenchers at their bellies,
There's nothing better, Sir, to blaze a Chollique.
And are not you a gentleman by this sir?
No, I disclaime't: no belly-ake upon earth
Shall make me one: he shall not think
To put his gripes upon me,
And wring out gentry so, and ten pound first.
If the wind instrument will make my wife one,
Let her enjoy't, for she was a Harpers Grand-childe:
But sir, for my particular, I renounce it.
Or to be called so?
I sir, or imagined.
None fitter for the place: give me thy hand.
A hundred thousand thanks, beside a Bribe sir.
You must take heed
Of thinking toward a gentleman, now.
Pish, I am not mad, I warrant you: nay more sir,
If one should twit me in the teeth that I'm a gentleman,
Twit me their worst, I am but one since Lemmas,
That I can prove, if they would see my heart out.
Marry in any case keep me that evidence.
Here comes my servant, Sir, Galoshio,
Has not his name for nought, he will be trod upon:
What says my Printer now?
Here is your last proof Sir.
You shall have perfect Books now in a twinkling.
These marks are ugly.
He says, sir, they're proper:
Blows should have marks, or else they are nothing worth.
But why a Peel-crow here?
I told 'em so sir:
A Scar-crow had been better.
How Slave? look you Sir,
Did not I say, this Whirrit, and this Bob,
Should be both Pica Roman.
So said I Sir, both Picked Romans,
And he has made 'em Welch Bills,
Indeed I know not what to make on 'em.
Hay-day; a Souse, Italica?
Yes, that may hold Sir,
Souse is a bonaroba, so is Flops too.
But why stands Bastinado so far off here?
Alas you must allow him room to lay about him, sir.
Why lies this Spurn lower then that Spurn, sir?
Marry this signifies one kicked down stairs, sir,
The other in a Gallery: I asked him all these questions.
Your Books name?
Prithee Lapet mind me, you never told me yet.
Marry but shall sir: it is called The up-rising of the kick,
And the downfall of the Duello.
Bring that to pass you'll prove a happy member,
And doe your Country service: your young bloods
Will thank you then, when they see foure-score.
I hope
To save my hundred Gentlemen a month by it,
Which will be very good for the private house.
Look you, your Table's finished sir already.
Why then behold my Master-piece: see, see, sir,
Here's all your Blows, and Blow-men whatsoever,
Set in their lively colours, givers, and takers.
Troth wondrous fine, sir.
Nay, but mark the postures,
The standing of the takers I admire more then the givers,
They stand scornfully, most contumeliously, I like not thē,
Oh here's one cast into a comely figure.
My Master means him there that's cast down headlong.
How sweetly does this fellow take his Dowst?
Stoops like a Cammell, that Heroic beast,
At a great load of Nut-megs; and how meekly
This other fellow here receives his Whirrit?
Oh Master here's a fellow stands most gallantly,
Taking his kick in private behind the hangings,
And raising up his hips to it. But oh, sir,
How daintily this man lies trampled on?
Would I were in thy place, what ever thou art:
How lovely he endures it?
But will not these things, sir, be hard to practise, think you?
Oh, easy, sir: Isle teach 'em in a Dance.
How? in a dance?
Isle lose my new place else,
What ere it be; I know not what it is yet.
And now you put me in mind, I could employ it well,
For your grace, specially: For the Dukes cozen
Is by this time in's violent fit of mirth,
And a devise must be sought out for suddenly,
To over-cloy the passion.
Say no more, sir,
Isle fit you with my Scholars, new practitioners,
Endurers of the time.
Whereof I am one sir.
You carry it away smooth; give me thy hand, sir.
Ha, ha, ha. 
Hark, hark, how loud his fit's grown.
Ha, ha, ha.
Now let our sister lose no time, but ply it
With all the power she has.
Her shame grows big, brother;
The Cupids shape will hardly hold it longer,
It would take up half an Ell of China Damask more,
And all too little: it struts per'lously:
There is no tamp'ring with these Cupids longer,
The mere conceit with woman-kinde works strong.
Ha, ha, ha.
The laugh comes nearer now,
It were good we were not seen yet. 
Ha, ha, ha.
And was he bastinadoed to the life? ha, ha, ha.
I prithee say, Lord General, how did the Rascals
Entrench themselves?
Most deeply, politically, all in ditches.
Ha, ha, ha.
It is thought he'll ne'er bear arms in the field again,
Has much ado, to lift 'em to his head, sir.
I would he had.
On either side round Truncheons plaid so thick,
That Shoulders, Chines, nay Flanks were paid to the quick.
Well said Lord General: ha, ha, ha.
But pray how grew the difference first betwixt you?
There was never any sir; there lies the jest man;
Only because he was taller then his brother;
There's all my quarrel to him; and me thought
He should be beaten for it, my mind so gave me, sir,
I could not sleep for it; Ha, ha, ha, ha.
Another good jest quickly, while it is hot now;
Let me not laugh in vain: ply me, O ply me,
As you will answer't to my Cozen Duke.
Alas, who has a good jest?
I fall, I dwindle in it.
Ten Crowns for a good jest: have you a good jest, sir?
A pretty moral one.
Let's have it, what ere it be.
There comes a Cupped
Drawn by six fools.
That's nothing.
Help it, help it then.
I have known six hundred fools drawn by a Cupped.
I that, that, that's the smarter Moral: ha, ha, ha.
Now I begin to be Song-ripe methinks.
Isle sing you a pleasant air, sir, before you ebb.
Oh how my Lungs doe tickle? ha, ha, ha.
Oh how my Lungs doe tickle? oh, oh, ho, ho.
Set a sharp Jest
Against my breast,
Then how my Lungs doe tickle?
As Nightingales,
And things in Cambric rails,
Sing best against a prickle.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
Ho, ho, ho, ho, ha.
Laugh.
Laugh.
Laugh.
Laugh.
Wide.
Loud.
And vary.
A smile is for a simpering Novice.
One that ne'er tasted Caviar,
Nor knows the smack of dear Anchovies.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Ho, ho, ho, ho, ho.
A giggling waiting wench for me,
That shows her teeth how white they be.
A thing not fit for gravity,
For theirs are foul and hardly three.
Ha, ha, ha.
Ho, ho, ho.
Democritus, thou ancient Fleerer,
Now I miss thy laugh, and have since.
There you named the famous Geerer,
That ever geared in Rome, or Athens.
Ha, ha, ha.
Ho, ho, ho.
How brave lives he that keeps a fool,
Although the rate be deeper?
But he that is his own fool sir,
Does live a great deal cheaper.
Sure I shall burst, burst, quite break thou art so witty.
It is rare to break at Court for that belongs to the City.
Ha, ha, my spleen is almost worn to the last laughter.
O keep a corner for a friend, a jest may come hereof∣la.
Twinge all now, twinge, I say.
Down derry.
Not angry Law, nor doors of Brass shall keep me
From my wrongs expiation, to thy Bowels,
I return my disgrace; and after turn
My face to any death that can be sentenced.
Murder, O murder, stop the murderer there—
I am glad hoe's gone; he has almost trod my guts out;
Follow him who list for me, Isle have no hand in it.
Oh it was your luck and mine to be squelched Mr.
Has stamped my very Puddings into Pancakes.
O Brothers, oh, I fear it is mortal: help, O help,
I'm made the wretched'st woman, by this accident,
That ever love beguiled. 
We are undone Brother,
Our shames are too apparent: Away receptacle
Of Luxury, and dishonour, most unfortunate,
To make thy self but lucky to thy spoil,
After thy Sexes manner: lift him up Brother;
He breathes not to our comfort, hoe's too wasted
Ever to cheer us more: A Surgeon speedily;
Hence; the unhappiest that ere stepped aside,
She'll be a Mother before shoe's known a Bride.
Thou had a most unfortunate conception,
What ere thou prov'st to be; in midst of mirth
Comes ruin, for a welcome, to thy birth. 
This is a beautiful life now; privacy
The sweetness and the benefit of essence:
I see there is no man, but may make his paradise;
And it is nothing, but his love, and dotage
Upon the worlds foul joys, that keeps him out on it:
For he that lives retired in mind, and spirit,
Is still in paradise, and has his innocence,
Partly allowed for his companion too,
As much as stands with justice: here no eyes
Shoot their sharp pointed scorns upon my shame;
They know no terms of reputation here,
No punctual limits, or precise dimensions;
Plain downright honesty is all the beauty
And elegance of life found amongst shepherds;
For knowing nothing nicely, or desiring it,
Quits many a vexation from the mind,
With which our quainter knowledge does abuse us;
The name of envy is a stranger here,
That dries men's bloods abroad, robs health and rest,
Why here's no such fury thought on: no, nor falsehood,
That brotherly disease, fellow-like devil,
That plays within our bosom, and betrays us.
Oh are you here?
La Nove, it is strange to see thee.
I have rid one horse to death,
To find you out, sir.
I am not to be found of any man
That saw my shame, nor seen long.
Good, your attention:
You ought to be seen now, and found out sir,
If ever you desire before your ending
To perform one good office, nay a dear one,
Mans time can hardly match it.
Be it as precious
As reputation; if it come from Court
I will not hear on it.
You must hear of this, Sir.
Must?
You shall hear it.
I love thee, that thoul't dye.
It were nobler in me,
Then in you living: you will live a murderer,
If you deny this office.
Even to death sir.
Why then you'll kill your brother.
How?
Your Brother sir:
Bear witness heaven, this man destroys his brother
When he may save him, his least breath may save him:
Can there be wilfuller destruction?
He was forced to take a most unmanly wrong,
Above the suffering virtue of a Soldier,
Has killed his Injurer, a work of honour;
For which, unless you save him, he dyes speedily
My conscience is discharged, I'm but a friend,
A Brother should go forward where I end. 
Dyes?
Say he be nought, that's nothing to my goodness,
Which ought to shine through use, or else it loses
The glorious name it is known by: hoe's my brother;
Yet peace is above blood: Let him go; I,
But whore's the nobleness of affection then?
That must be cared for too, or I'm imperfect,
The same blood that stood up in wrath against him,
Now in his misery runs all to pity;
I'd rather dye than speak one syllable
To save my self: but living as I am,
There's no avoiding on it, the worlds humanity
Expects it hourly from me: curse of fortune,
I took my leave so well too: Let him dye,
It is but a brother lost; so pleasingly,
And swiftly I came off, it were more then irksomeness,
To tread that path again; and I shall never
Depart so handsomely: But then whore's posterity?
The consummation of our house and name?
I'm torn in pieces betwixt love and shame. 
Good morrow fellow Poltrot, and Moulbazon,
Good morrow fellows all.
Monsieur Lapet?
Look, I've remembered you, here's books a piece for you.
O sir, we dearly thank you.
So you may;
There's two impressions gone already sirs.
What no? in so short a time?
It is as I tell you sir,
My Kick sells gallantly, I thank my stars.
So does your Table; you may thank the Moon too.
It is the Book sells the Table.
But it is the Book-seller
That has the money for 'em, I'm sure o'that.
Twill much enrich the Company of Stationers,
It is thought twill prove a lasting benefit,
Like the Wise Masters, and the Almanacs,
The hundred Novels, and the Book of Cookery,
For they begin already to engross it,
And make it a stock-book, thinking indeed
Twill prove too great a benefit, and help,
For one that's new set up: they know their way,
And make him Warden, ere his beard be gray.
Is it possible such virtue should lye hid,
And in so little paper?
How? Why there was the Carpenter,
An unknown thing, an odoriferous Pamphlet,
Yet no more Paper, by all computation,
Then Ajax Telamon would use at once,
Your Herring proved the like, able to buy
Another Fishers Folly, and your Pasquill
Went not below the mad-caps of that time,
And shall my elaborate Kick come behind think you?
Yes, it must come behind, it is in Italica too,
According to your humour.
Not in sale, varlet.
In sale, sir? it shall sail beyond 'em all I trow.
What have you there now? oh, Page, 21.
That Page is come to his years, he should be a serving-man.
Mark how I snap up the Duello there:
One would not use a dog so,
I must needs say; butt's for the common good.
Nay sir, your Commons seldom fight at sharp,
But buffet in a ware-house.
This will save
Many a gentleman of good blood from bleeding sirs,
I have a curse from many a Barber Surgeon;
They'd give but too much money to call it in;
Turn to Page 45. see what you find there.
O out upon him,
Page 45. that's an old thief indeed.
The Duke, clap down your Books; away Galoshio.
Indeed I am too foul to be in the presence,
They use to shake me off at the chamber door still. 
Good my Lord, grant my suit; let me not rise
Without the comfort on it: I have not often
Been tedious in this kind.
Sister, you wrong your self,
And those great virtues that your fame is made of,
To waste so much breath for a Murderers life.
You cannot hate the offence more then I doe, sir,
Nor the offender, the respect I owe
Unto his absent brother, makes me a suitor,
A most importunate sister; make me worthy
But of this one request.
I am deaf
To any importunacy, and sorry
For your forgetfulness; you never injured
Your worth so much, you ought to be rebuked for it:
Pursue good ways, end as you did begin,
It is half the guilt to speak for such a sin.
This is loves beggary right, that now is ours,
When Ladies love, and cannot show their powers. 
La Nove?
My Lord.
Are these our new attendants?
We are my Lord, and will endure as much
As better men, my Lord, and more I trust.
What's hee?
My Lord, a decayed Gentleman,
That will doe any service.
A decayed one?
A renounced one indeed; for this place only.
We renounce him then, go, discharge him instantly.
He that disclaims his gentry for mere gains,
That man's too base to make a vassal on.
What says the Duke?
Faith little to your comfort sir,
You must be a gentleman again.
How?
There's no remedy.
Marry, the fates forfend: ne'er while I breath sir.
The Duke will have it so, there's no resisting.
He spied it in your fore-head.
My wife's doing.
She thought she should be put below her betters now,
And sued to have me a gentleman again.
And very like sir:
Marry Isle give you this comfort when ell's done,
You'll never pass but for a scurvy one,
That's all the help you have: come show your pace.
The heaviest gentleman that ever lost place;
Bear witness I am forced to it. 
Though you have a courser title yet upon you,
Then those that left your places, without blame,
Tic in your power to make your selves the same:
I cannot make you gentlemen, that's a work
Raised from your own deservings; merit, manners,
And in-borne virtue doe's it. Let your own goodness
Make you so great, my power shall make you greater;
And more t'encourage you, this I add again,
There's many Grooms now exact Gentlemen.
Me thinks it is strange to me to enter here:
Is there in nature such an awful power,
To force me to this place? and make me doe this?
Is mans affections stronger then his will?
His resolution? was I now resolved
Never to see this place more? Doe I bear
Within my breast one blood that confounds the other?
The blood of love, and will, and the last weakest?
Had I ten Millions, I would give it all now,
I were but past it, or it would never come;
For I shall never do it, or not do it well,
But spoil it utterly betwixt two passions.
Yonder's the Duke himself, I will not do it now,
Had twenty lives their several sufferings in him. 
Who's that went out now?
I saw none, my Lord.
Nor you?
I saw the glimpse of one my Lord.
What ere it was, methought it pleased me strangely,
And suddenly my joy was ready for it.
Did you not mark it better?
Troth my Lord,
We gave no great heed to it.
Twill not be answered,
It brings me hither still; by maine force hither:
Either I must give over to profess humanity,
Or I must speak for him.
It is here again:
No marvel it was so pleasing, it is delight
And worth it self, now it appears unclouded.
My Lord—
He turns away from me: by this hand
I am ill-us'd of all sides: it is a fault
That fortune ever had, to abuse a goodness.
Methought you were saying somewhat.
Mark the Language,
As coy as face; I see twill ne'er be granted.
We little looked in troth to see you here yet.
Not till the day after my brothers death, I think.
Sure some great business drew you.
No insooth, sir,
Only to come to see a brother dye sir,
That I may learn to go too; and if he deceive me not,
I think he will doe well in it of a soldier,
Manly, and honestly: and if he weep then,
I shall not think the worse on's man-hood for it,
Because hoe's leaving of that part that has it.
Has slain a noble gentleman, think on it, sir.
I would I could not sir.
Our Kinsman too.
All this is but worse sir.
When it is at worst,
Yet seeing thee, he lives.
My Lord—
He lives,
Believe it as thy bliss, he dyes not for it:
Will this make satisfaction for things past?
Oh my Lord—
Will it? speak.
With greater shame to my unworthiness.
Rise then, wee're even: I never found it harder
To keep just with a man: my great work's ended.
I knew your brothers pardon was your suit, sir,
How ever your nice modesty held it back.
I take a joy now, to confess it, sir.
My Lord—
Hear me first, sir, what ever your news be:
Set free the Soldier instantly.
Tic done, my Lord.
How?
In effect: it was part of my news too,
There's fair hope of your noble kinsmans life sir.
What say thou?
And the most admired change
That living flesh ever had; he's not the man my Lord;
Death cannot be more free from passions, sir,
Then he is at this instant: hoe's so meek now,
He makes those seem passionate, was never thought of:
And for he fears his moods have oft disturbed you sir,
Hoe's only hasty now for his forgiveness,
And here behold him sir.
Let me give thanks first: our worthy Cousin—
Your unworthy trouble sir;
For which, with all acknowledged reverence,
I ask your pardon; and for injury
More known and wilful, I have chose a wise,
Without your counsel, or consent, my Lord.
A wife? where is she sir?
This noble Gentlewoman.
How?
Whose honour my forgetful times much wronged.
Hoe's madder then he was.
I would have sworn for him.
The Cupped, cousin?
Yes, this worthy Lady, sir.
Still worse and worse.
Our sister under pardon, my Lord.
What?
Which shape Love taught her to assume.
Is it truth then?
It appears plainly now below the waste my Lord.
Shamont, did ever read of a she-Cupid?
Never in fiction yet: but it might hold sir;
For Desire is of both Genders.
Make that good here: 
I take thee at thy word, sir.
O my Lord,
Love would appear too bold, and rude from me,
Honour and admiration are her rights,
Her goodness is my Saint, my Lord.
I see,
You're both too modest to bestow your selves:
I'll save that virtue still; it is but my pains: come,
It shall be so.
This gift does but set forth my poverty.
Sir, that which you complain of is my riches.
Soldier, now every noise sounds peace, you are welcome.
Sir my repentance sues for your blessed favour,
Which once obtained, no injury shall lose it;
Isle suffer mightier wrongs.
Rise, loved and pardoned;
For where hope failed, nay Art it self resigned,
Thou'st wrought that cure, which skill could never find;
Nor did there cease, but to our peace extend;
Never could wrongs boast of a nobler end.
IT's grown in fash'on of late in these days,
To come and beg a sufferance to our Plays;
Faith Gentlemen our Poet ever writ
Language so good, mixed with such sprightly wit,
He made the Theatre so sovereign
With his rare Scaenes, he scorned this crouching vein:
We stabbed him with keen daggers when we prayed
Him write a Preface to a Play well made.
He could not write these toys; it was easier far,
To bring a Felon to appear at the Bar,
So much he hated baseness; which this day,
His Scaenes will best convince you of in's Play,
OUr Poet bid us say for his own part,
He cannot lay too much forth of his Art:
But fears our over-acting passions may,
As not adorn, deface his laboured Play:
Yet still he is resolute for what is writ
Of Nicer valour, and assumes the wit:
But for the Love-Scaenes which he ever meant,
Cupped in's Petticoat should represent,
He will stand no shock of censure; the Plaie's good,
He says he knows it, (if well understood.)
But we (blind god) beg, if thou art divine,
Thou'lt shoot thy Arrows round, this Play was thine.

